                       we +        a
                                  il   rE.

                   .              ay




  RD'TO THE 1983 EDITION
EMPATINSO WATSON.) 2) hava                                Ga.
                              :                          ¥,
         ae                                  4   q   j        4   :
w\   ee   a5
            Digitized by the Internet Archive
                         in 2024




https://archive.org/details/studyofarcheologO000tayl_
                                                  w3p3
A STUDY OF ARCHEOLOGY
A STUDY OF ARCHEOLOGY
            BY WALTER W. TAYLOR




       FOREWORD TO THE 1983 EDITION

             BY PATTY JO WATSON




 SOUTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY AT CARBONDALE
 CENTER FOR ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INVESTIGATIONS
CAI edition, with special thanks to

     Walter W. Taylor                        bas
     The  Ameri can Anthro pologi cal Associ ation
     The Southern Illinois University Press
     W. Kenney Withers
     John K. DeBacher




1983 cover design by Thomas W. Gatlin




Copyright ©1983 by the Board of Trustees,
             Southern Illinois University.
All Rights Reserved.


Standard Book Number: ISBN 0-88104-009-6

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 83-071270




A Study of Archeology was first published in 1948, as Memoir 69 of the American
     Anthropological Association.
Reprinted privately in 1964 by Walter W. Taylor.
Reprinted in 1967 by the Southern Illinois University Press.
Second reprinting by the Southern Illinois University in 1968, with a Foreword by
     Walter W. Taylor; additional reprintings in 1971 and 1973.



Printed in the United States of America.
                                     CONTENTS
Foreword to the 1983 edition
Foreword to the 1968 printing

       PART |            ’
Introduction
Me     The Development of Archeology
2.     Archeology: History or Anthropology?
3.     An Analysis of Americanist Archeology in the United States

       PART Il
Introduction
4.     A Concept of Culture for Archeology
5.     The Nature of Archeological Data:
       Typology and Classification                                                  113
6.     An Outline of Procedures for the Conjunctive Approach                        152
NOTES                                                                               203

BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                        223

INDEX                                                                               257




                                 ILLUSTRATIONS

BETWEEN PAGES 160-161

Plate 1. Samples of fabric from Coahuila, Mexico
Plate 2. Basket-Maker basketry from Northeastern Arizona

BETWEEN PAGES 176-177


Plate 3. Cave distributions of Humboldtiana and pion shells from Coahuila, Mexico
Plate 4. Schemata from two pueblo rooms from New Mexico
    Saye   aay
.   Nast contin va
                      FOREWORD TO THE 1983 EDITION

                                  BY PATTY JO WATSON


A Study of Archeology by Walter W. Taylor was accepted by Harvard University
     as a Ph.D. dissertation in 1943. It was published in revised form in 1948 as
Memoir 69 of the American Anthropological Association; reprinted privately by
Taylor in 1964; and reprinted again by the Southern Illinois University Press as an
Arcturus paperback in 1967, 1968, 1971, and 1973. Taylor himself wrote a Fore-
word for the fourth printing in 1968; and now in 1983 we have the seventh printing,
by the Southern Illinois University’s Center for Archaeological Investigations,
marking the 40th anniversary of this well-known critique.
    A Study of Archeology is a remarkable volume for a number of reasons. On first
inspection, it might appear that Taylor was almost exactly twenty years before his
time when he wrote the book in 1942, because it was not until the early 1960s that
the program he described began to be widely discussed (Binford, 1962, begins this
period of discussion). However, as Taylor makes clear (pp. 90—93), his call for re-
form was preceded by others, less substantive and detailed than his but no less ex-
plicit; and there were at least a few 1940s and 1950s practitioners of the kind of
archeology he advocated (for example, Lewis and Kneberg, 1946, cited by Taylor,
p. 9; and Deetz, some of whose 1958 research was published in The Dynamics of
Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics, 1965).
      In the Old World, Sir Mortimer Wheeler (1954, Preface, Chapters                 1 and 17)
exhorted his archeological colleagues to aspire to goals quite similar to—and per-
haps influenced by—those Taylor had defined 10 years previously for Americanists:
     . we had perforce devoted a great deal of our time to the systematization of cultures. . . .
Cultural catalogues are all very well so far as they go. But they do not, of themselves, go very
far. They are a means to an end. An admitted need of the present day is the methodical explo-
ration of the social unit on a more expansive scale than has been normal in the past. . . . We
now   need full-scale three-dimensional excavation of complete settlements; the provision of
reliable data for estimating the density and social structure of population. Up to date, very
little of the requisite work has been undertaken and its distribution is very uneven. Indeed,
nearly the whole social problem lies before us, and we are now at last fit to tackle it. I envy
the new generation its great opportunity, as never before, to dig up people rather than mere
things . . . (Wheeler, 1954, pp. 244—246)

    Thus, Taylor was not the only archeologist committed to the ideals expressed in
A Study of Archeology. But he was the first archeologist to go beyond rather brief,
programmatic statements to present a comprehensive account of a new approach
to the archeological record: the conjunctive approach. His book made a very power-
ful impression when it first appeared, and it has continued to be tremendously
influential.
                                                                                   d positive
     The book’s initial impact, however, was not followed by any concerte
 response. At least two factors contributed to this seeming apathy       and  lack of interest
 in the years following its appearance in 1948. One       is that   Taylor’s   Study  is not a
 particularly easy book. It is a closely reasoned essay  that   makes   serious  demands     on
 the reader, and that necessitates rereading  .  The other   is  that  Taylor   examined    the
 work of several leading archeologists and found what he analyzed to be seriously
 inadequate by his standards. His analyses are very effective in conveying his mean-
 ing about what should be reformed and how, but they probably did not engender
 sympathy for his views among those whose work was discussed.
     Nevertheless, Taylor’s purpose in publishing A Study of Archeology was not to
 generate ill-will nor merely to attract attention but rather to stimulate examination
 of and assessment of aims, goals, and purposes by Americanist archeologists. There
 was a period of just such intense evaluation as he called for, in the “new archeol-
 ogy” discussions of the 1960s and early 1970s. Taylor perceived much of the pro-
 gram of new archeology to be “practical application of a basic conceptual scheme,
 the earliest more or less complete expression of which was the) conjunctive ap-
 proach”)(Taylor, 1972). He did, however, disagree with the new archeologists in
 their disregard for construction of cultural contexts and for their adherence to a dy-
 namic concept of culture (that of Leslie White) he thought ill-suited to the archeo-
 logical enterprise (Taylor, 1972, pp. 31—32).
     Meanwhile in England, Sir Mortimer Wheeler’s admonitions about a broadened
 approach to archeology were pursued by David Clarke and his students (Clarke,
 1973; Isaac 1971). Almost simultaneously Clarke in the Old World (1972; 1973)
 and Schiffer in the New World (1972; 1976) drew attention to the necessity of inves-
  tigating how archeological sites are created, and how they are altered before arche-
  ologists ever begin work on them.
       By the late 1970s and early 1980s, however, one finds quite different issues (pri-
  marily stemming from passage in 1974 of the Archeological Conservation Act, and
  from the subsequent expansion of contract archeology) dominating theoretical dis-
  cussion. It is striking that in 1983 as A Study of Archeology is being reprinted once
  more, there is not only somewhat of a dearth of concern about grand theory in ar-
  cheology (Dunnell, 1980, is one of the rare exceptions), but also there is some
  active sentiment against it (Flannery, 1982). Before considering this phenomenon
  further, I should like to review Taylor’s main points and relate them briefly to subse-
  quent developments in Americanist archeology.
     _Taylor’s arguments are all directed to one goal: He intends to dislodge Ameri-
  canist archeologists of the 1940s from their preoccupation with time-space systema-
  tics, and to encourage them to make more and better use of their data. He describes
  this as a shift from a concern solely with chronicle to a recognition that archeology
 _should be a means of recovering cultural contexts that are as full-bodied as possi--
Eble: As noted above, he illustrates the disparity between the two orientations by
  analyzing the words and deeds of several prominent archeologists (see his Chap-
                                                                                            xi

> ter 3). In essence, he argues for a functionalist, contextualist view of the archeo-
   logical record as a source of information about human behavior. Archeology has
   developed from antiquarianism (a focus on isolated objects in and of themselves) to
 - concern with the chronological and spatial loci of ancient materials. Taylor asks for
   more documentation and analyses of the cultural contexts in which those materials
 _ occur and of the relationships of all such items and loci to each other. The book
_concludes with a.ather detailed exposition of his recommended procedure: the/con-
_junctive approach|(Chapter 6). Here he anticipates nearly everything that has come
  to be expected in good archeological reports: the importance of understanding and
  working in terms of the natural stratigraphy; the importance of exact proveniences;
  the importance of biological data, of the entire paleoenvironment, and of investigat-
  ing the natural resources potentially available to prehistoric human populations; the
  importance of prompt and full publication; and the need for archeological field
  schools to train students in recovery techniques and in documentation procedures.
      Taylor also stresses the necessity for interdisciplinary research in archeology,
. and the desirability of a central clearing house for expediting such research. There
are no clearing houses yet, but the interdisciplinary approach to archeology—
  although still subject to some stresses and strains (Butzer, 1975; Schoenwetter,
  1981)—is thoroughly a part of contemporary practice.
      Elsewhere in A Study of Archeology Taylor anticipates more recent discussions
  of typology (compare Chapter 5 with Hill and Evans, 1972; and with Watson,
  LeBlanc, and Redman,       1971, pp. 126-134).
      Taylor separates empirical types (such as those defined by archeologists) from
  cultural types (those characterizing the specific ethnic groups who produced the ob-
  jects in question). He stresses (p. 144) that there are classifications inherent in the
  data should the analyst want to use them, but that the analyst can also create other,
  different categories should that be necessary.
      Other portions of Taylor’s text also closely foreshadow developments in archeo-
  logical theory that did not follow until decades later. For example, in Chapter 4 he
 parecusscs. the,culture concept in considerable detail. His conclusion is that the locus
  ofctulture jis in the minds of individual human beings but that cultural patterning in
  people’ S Pune is at least partially expressed in their behavior and in the material
  results of that behavior, which he calls objectifications of culture. Clearly this is yet
  another point at which he anticipates a basic tenet of Binfordian new archeology:
 _We should not equate “material culture” with technology. . . . It has often been suggested
  that we cannot dig up a social system or ideology. Granted we cannot excavate a kinship
  terminology or a philosophy, but we can and do excavate the material items which functioned
  together with these more behavioral elements within the appropriate cultural subsystems. The
_ formal structure of artifact assemblages together with the between element contextual rela-
  tionships should and do present a systematic and understandable picture of the total extinct
 cultural system. (Binford, 1962, pp. 218—219; emphasis Binford’s)
 Xil

       Yet Taylor’s insistence (see especially Chapter 4 and parts of Chapter 5) that the
                                                                                 at-
      of culture is in mental constructs is also a point of departure for recent
 source
 tempts at delineating those mental constructs via structuralist and symbolic archeol-
 ogy (Hodder,     1982; Hodder, ed., 1982; Leone,     1982),as well as a link with the
~ closely-related ideational archeology of the late 1970s (for example, Hall, 1976,
  1977; see Leone, 1981 for discussion of another kind of ideational approach to
 archeology).
     I am not sure what Taylor would say about the anti-theory backlash now emerg-
 ing in Americanist archeology. Perhaps it is only the normal return swing of the
 pendulum that occurs in one form or another in all scholarly disciplines. There is
 certainly no indication that the field as a whole is heading back towards a blind de-
 votion to time-space systematics. To the contrary, two new periodicals devoted to
 anthropological archeology have recently been established (Advances in Archeo-
 logical Method and Theory, and Journal of Anthropological Archeology), and a
 series of overtly theoretical and philosophical books are appearing (Wylie, 1981;
 Salmon,     1982; Binford, In Press; Watson, LeBlanc, and Redman, In Press; Hanen
 and Kelley, Forthcoming). I think it most likely that we are simply settling down
 to the operationalization necessitated by general commitment to the goals Taylor
 and the new archeologists advocate. Meanwhile, those goals are being actively dis-
 cussed in other archeological circles (Dever, 1981; Dyson, 1981; Wiseman, 1980a;
 Gould, ed., 1983).
     Other contemporary challenges to Taylor’s views come from at least two dif-
 ferent directions: from the burgeoning of contract archeology since passage of the
 Archeological Conservation Act in 1974; and from those who believe archeology
 should be an entirely autonomous discipline, at least in so far as student-training
 and institutional base are concerned.
     For several years, Americanist archeology has been dominated by contract
 work, with results that are widely discussed (Dunnell, 1979, pp. 446—449, and
 1981, pp. 431-432; Lipe, 1977; Wendorf, 1979). Some aspects of contract archeol-
 ogy are quite compatible with Taylor’s views of how archeological research should
 be done; at any rate the relatively generous funding level of many projects guaran-
 tees salaried interdisciplinary work with reports promptly issued. However, the con-
 straints on where and how the work is to be done and on problem-oriented research
 are, of course, considerable. Moreover, the divisiveness inherent in competitive
 bidding open to free-lance profit-making corporations, private non-profit corpora-
 tions, and universities or museums and other institutions is undeniable, especially
 when large sums of money and extensive archeological resources are at stake. It
 remains to be seen how well the field will weather these diverse forces.
     The move to autonomy from anthropology or any other overarching disciplinary
 focus is apparent in the emergence of a few independent archeological departments
 and programs (Wiseman,       1980a; and 1980b). The Center for Archaeological Stud-
 ies at Boston University is the latest of these, but there are separate departments of
                                                                                 xiii

archeology at Simon Fraser University and at the University of Calgary. Some of the
impetus to separatism undoubtedly arises from practical and logistical advantages,
as Wiseman makes clear in the article just cited. But some of this impetus is also
due to the fact that there is so little common ground between most of archeology
and one of the most popular forms of contemporary sociocultural anthropology:
symbolic and structuralist anthropology. Even so—as noted above—structuralist _
themes   are appearing within archeology, and at least one thoughtful observer sees
some possibility of rapprochement between empirically-based, 1960s—1970s arche-
ology and structuralist archeology (Wylie, 1982).
    A separatist conception of archeology on practical grounds might, at first
glance, seem compatible with the conclusion to Taylor’s Chapter 2 (p. 44) that ar-
cheology per se is (only) a method and a set of techniques for obtaining cultural
information. But of course Taylor’s major purpose in writing A Study of Archeology
was to establish why and how archaeologists must give sustained careful attention to
retrieving cultural contexts that are as complete as the record permits. Whatever the
practicalities may dictate, the intellectual ties of archeology to cultural anthropol-
ogy and other social sciences must remain closely binding.
    The world of archeology is a very much larger and more complex place now than
it was 40 years ago when A Study of Archeology first appeared. Nevertheless, the
issues Taylor addresses are still extremely important, indeed they are foundational,
and what he says about them is as vital now as it was then. I commend his book to
the serious attention of every student of archeology.




                                  REFERENCES


Binford, Lewis R.
1962     Archaeology as Anthropology. American Antiquity 28: 217-225.
In Press    Working at Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
Butzer, Karl
1975.      The ‘Ecological’ Approach to Prehistory: Are We Really Trying? American
        Antiquity 40: 106-111.
Clarke, David L.           .
1972    Review of Patty Jo Watson, Steven A. LeBlanc and Charles L. Redman: Ex-
     planation in archaeology: an explicitly scientific approach. New York and Lon-
     don: Columbia University Press, 1971. Antiquity 46: 237—239.
1973    Archaeology: the Loss of Innocence. Antiquity 47: 6-18.
XiV

Clarke, David L., editor
1972    Models in Archaeology. London: Methuen.
Deetz, James                                                                    a
1965     The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics. //linois Studies in
       Anthropology No. 4. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press.
Dever, William
1981      The Impact of the “New Archaeology” on Syro-Palestinian Archaeology.
       Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 242: 15-17.
Dunnell, Robert C.
1979    Trends in Current Americanist Archaeology. American Journal of Archaeol-
     ogy 83: 437-449.
1980 Evolutionary Theory in Archaeology. Advances in Archaeological Method
     and Theory 3: 35-99.
1981    Americanist Archaeology: The 1980 Literature. American Journal of Ar-
     chaeology 85: 429-445.
Dyson, Stephen L.
1981 A Classical Archaeologist’s Response to the “New Archaeology.” Bulletin
     of the American Schools of Oriental Research 242: 7-13.
Flannery, Kent V.
1982     The Golden Marshalltown: A Parable for the Archaeology of the 1980s.
       American Anthropologist 84: 265-278.
Gould, Richard A., editor
1983      Shipwrecks   as Anthropology.   Albuquerque:   University   of New   Mexico
       Press.
Hall, Robert L.
1976   Ghosts, Water Barriers, Corn and Sacred Enclosures in the Eastern Wood-
    lands. American Antiquity 41: 360—364.
1977 An Anthropocentric Perspective for Eastern United States Prehistory.
    American Antiquity 42: 499-518.
Hanen, Marsha, and Jane Kelley
Forthcoming   Archaeology and the Methodology of Science. New York: Academic
     Press.
Hill, James N., and Robert K. Evans
1972      A Model for Classification and Typology. In D. Clarke, editor, Models in
       Archaeology. London: Methuen, pp. 231—273.
Hodder, Ian
1982     Symbols in Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                                      XV


Hodder, Ian, editor
1982     Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press:
Isaac, Glynn
1971    Whither Archaeology? Antiquity 45: 123-129.
Leone, Mark
1981    The Relationship between Artifacts and the Public in Outdoor History Mu-
     seums. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 376: 301—314.
1982    Some Opinions about Recovering Mind. American Antiquity 47: 742-760.
Lewis, T.M.N., and M. Kneberg
1946   Hiwassee Island. Knoxville, Tennessee: University of Tennessee Press.
Lipe, William D.
1977   A Conservation       Model     for American   Archaeology.   In M. Schiffer and
       G. Gumerman,     editors,    Conservation   Archaeology.   New   York:   Academic
       Press, pp. 19-42.
Salmon, Merrilee
1982     Philosophy and Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
Schiffer, Michael B.
1972   Archaeological Context and Systemic Context. American Antiquity 37:
     156-165.
1976   Behavioral Archeology. New York: Academic Press.
Schiffer, Michael B., and George Gumerman, editors
1977     Conservation Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
Schoenwetter, James A.
1981     Prologue to a Contextual Archaeology. Journal of Archaeological Science 8:
       367-378.
Taylor, Walter W.
1972     Old Wine and New Skins: A Contemporary Parable. In M. Leone, editor,
      Contemporary Archaeology. Carbondale and Edwardsville, Hlinois: Southern
      Illinois University Press, pp. 28-33.
Watson, Patty Jo, Steven A. LeBlanc, and Charles L. Redman
1971    Explanation in Archeology: an Explicitly Scientific Approach. New York:
     Columbia University Press.
In Press Archeological Explanation: the Scientific Method in Archeology. New
     York: Columbia University Press.
Wendorf, Fred
1979     Changing Values in Archaeology. American Antiquity 44: 641-643.
Wheeler, Sir Mortimer
1954     Archaeology from the Earth. Baltimore, Maryland: Pelican Books.
XV1


Wiseman, James
1980a    Archaeology in the Future: An Evolving Discipline. American Journal of
     Archaeology 84: 279-285.
1980b    Archaeology as Archaeology. Journal of Field Archaeology 7: 149-151.
Wylie, M. Alison
1981    Positivism and the New Archaeology. Ph.D. dissertation, State University of
     New York at Binghamton, Department of Philosophy.
1982 Epistemological Issues Raised by a Structuralist Archaeology. In 1. Hodder
     editor, Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
     sity Press, pp. 39-46.
              FOREWORD           TO THE       1968 PRINTING



ae this fourth printing of A Study of Archeology is to appear full twenty
 years after the monograph was first published is gratifying indeed. It seems that
 the ideas which were presented then are still viable and possibly of even in-
 creasing interest, if the accelerating tempo of distribution is any criterion. In
 1948, I said that it did not matter whether my ideas turned out to be rallying
posts or targets, so long as the attention of archeologists could be brought to
 focus upon the nature of their objectives, their practices, and their conceptual
 tools. Evidently this has happened. The introspection which I explicitly hoped
 for has come about and produced results. Archeology in the United States today
is a remarkably different discipline from what it was in 1948 and, from my
viewpoint, the outlook for the future is tremendously encouraging and exciting.
      It is to the new generation of archeologists that I would like to dedicate
the present printing. I do not think I need point out to them that what they
find here is merely a beginning, a door to the future. I know that many of them
have already gone through that door and are busily tilling the greener and
broader fields on the other side. In fact, many of the methods of the so-called
“new archeology” implement the theoretical points and aims of what I have
called the conjunctive approach: the use of computers facilitates multivariate
factor analysis and the construction of contingency tables which in turn help to
make multiple classification at once more feasible, more operational, and
potentially more objective; emphasis is being placed upon broad culture con-
figurations, cultural contexts, settlement patterns, and ecological relationships;
conscious and intensive efforts are being made to squeeze the utmost from the
empirical data and to develop ever fuller cultural inferences, especially in the
realms of behavior and the non-material results of behavior. In view of these
and other present practices of the younger archeologists, it seems that the tenets
of the conjunctive approach, at least a goodly number of them, have been ac-
cepted at long last. A prediction made many years ago by one of my more sym-
pathetic colleagues has certainly come true: that A Study of Archeology would
not be widely accepted until a new generation of archeologists had developed
without so much subjective and emotional involvement in the then status quo.
     I have been asked many times whether my ideas have changed since I wrote
these pages. Of course they have—not basically but certainly in many details.
But that is a rather meaningless question anyway, because its answer is fore-
ordained: whatever the truth, one is not apt to admit to an unchanging mind!
I must confess that my greatest urge has been to add new ideas, to expand and
follow further some of the propositions put forward in 1948, but this would
                                        1
2                    A STUDY        OF    ARCHEOLOGY

involve much rewriting, virtually a new book, and I have had no inclination
to tackle such a project. Often I have been asked whether, in a new edition, I
would delete or revise or update the chapter on the analysis of Americanist
archeology. My answer has been a strong and confident “no.” Contrary to
what has apparently been the widespread view, that chapter is not a “polemic.”
I have always regarded it as an objective analysis from an explicitly stated
point of view, a critique as detailed and comprehensive and fair as I could make
it of archeological theory and practice, not of men. Therefore, until my opinions
change in regard to archeological research—and they have not—the chapter may
be allowed to stand as a series of illustrative, essentially impersonal, and thus
timeless examples.
    What, then, of A Study of Archeology and the conjunctive approach today?
 t is my hope that they will become more and more accepted as a source of
insights and fundamental ideas for a consistent theory of archeology and an
explicit point of departure for modern practice. I hope that they will continue
to encourage archeologists to make every effort to orient their problems along
cultural lines, to seek out available data with an ever finer perception, to com-
bine and recombine these data in order to abstract from their intrinsic conjunc-
tives their cultural significance, to push analysis and inference to the limits of ac-
ceptable logic and analogy, and to construct the fullest possible contexts for
the cultures they investigate. If the archeologists do these things, with or with-
out the aid of A Study of Archeology, I feel certain that many of them will wish
to pursue their studies into the realm of culture itself with which, as Anthro-
pology, I hope they can learn to deal—and in ways that will be applicable and
profitable to that broader discipline of which Americanist archeology has so
long claimed to be a part.
A STUDY OF ARCHEOLOGY
             (1948)


       WALTER W. TAYLOR
                      ay        oe         ee
              ‘gece        ©! «        el          VOR sewrist                                4
     a  si.                     =    ee                                          heer
    are’ ;                  7        a,            Fe         ae

  on
a e. 2
                      nes
                                    ial
                                           Seeds
                                                   Oe         ak wes
                                                                                     Semeee
                                                                                              Gem               ©
                       So           2m,        ©         PUN               aF:               Prowse
          =           Ses            Brill’         Oo        esate                          yes                 :
                                @          -                  ee                             ae       b=        =
                                                   96          «            O15 >. Bey


    OK ;cabs.tt
                                                                                     paw                  yoren
                                      -              a                           7       a            ee    oe)


    ba                                ae                  .                anit “i                                            ta
7   aa                 )                                                                          _       Sa:        ee       sie       7
     ie       ©                                                                  “oot             @t).      .        Jin          eae
    ve                                              eine MELA                                                   Seven
          -                                    .          O            |                 v            .    eT         |   \   a

                                                                   te the                                  ph             Sia! >
                                                                                     >                    4te,
    la                                                             7                         hoy 'Sadi
                                    Teale

                              INTRODUCTION
        HEN responsible newspapers and intelligent laymen identify the Sunday
        afternoon adventures of eager schoolboys as archeology and the little
curio-hunters themselves as archeologists, it may seem gratuitous to offer a full
volume on a conceptual scheme for archeological research. Nevertheless, it is just
this point of view, generous to a fault as it is, which prompts the present study.
For even within academic and scholarly circles, what passes for archeology has
a compass that is truly Jovian, and the resultant confusion of theoretical precepts
is largely responsible for the false position which, in many instances, the discipline
of archeology has come to assume.
     The development of archeology has been due to very diverse interests on the
part of those engaged in the work. History and folklore, art and architecture,
geology and the study of human evolution have all had their influence, and all
have brought concepts and objectives to bear upon the recovery of the remains
of man’s cultural past. Thus it is not strange that archeology displays a consider-
able divergence and even confusion in its theoretical structure, its aims, and with
regard to its relationships to other disciplines. At one moment we hear that it is a
branch of anthropology, at another that it aims to reconstruct the past and to
write history, and at yet another that it is chiefly concerned with art and art
history.
    The significant point is that there has been no concerted effort on the part of
the archeologists to resolve these conflicts of a theoretical order. There seems to
be either an unawareness of, or an unconcern with, the present ambiguous
situation. When statements of policy are made, and even these are but rare
occurrences, they are all too often set forth without regard for other, equally
positive but quite contradictory, pronouncements. Obviously basic concepts and
relationships to other disciplines need clarification, but this should not be done,
as has been the case in the past, in terms of some itself-undefined master
discipline or by reference to concepts and objectives whose implications are left
unexamined. Rather, the situation calls for explicit analysis and the subsequent
construction of an internally consistent, externally aware, and more or less
comprehensive conceptual scheme for archeological research. And above all, the
theoretical framework should be related by example to the practicalities of actual
research in order to clarify the whole.
     Any scheme which purports to serve as the conceptual structure of a discipline
should take into account the history of that discipline, should explicitly analyze
and either accept or reject (in whole or in part) its present condition, and should
offer some constructive plan for the future. Since it is my intention that this
                                          5
6


volume offer such a scheme, in Chapter 1, I shall give a brief outline of the
development of archeology as a field of study for the purpose of providing
a context and in order to bring out some of the causes contributing to what I
believe to be its unhealthy state. Beginning with Chapter 2 and throughout the
rest of the book, I shall reduce the scope of the analysis to archeology as it is
practiced in the United States upon cultures of the Western Hemisphere. I shall
be speaking exclusively of Americanist archeology in the United States, and
whether what is said applies to other fields and other traditions is for the people
concerned to judge: if the shoe fits, let them put it on. Chapter 2 itself consists
of an analysis of what seems to me to be the major theoretical ailment: the fact
that the archeologist of today is a Jekyll and Hyde, claiming to “do” history but
“be” an anthropologist without attempting to determine the relationships, if any,
between these two fields of study as they pertain to his own investigations. In this
analysis, history and anthropology will be defined, at least for present purposes,
and from this will come an explanation of the characters of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde and a resolution of the archeologist’s split personality. Chapter 3 examines
the condition of Americanist archeology in the United States by detailed con-
sideration of the published works of certain men who are generally conceded to
be among the leaders of that field. This will conclude Part I and the analysis
of the history and present status of (Americanist) archeology.
     Part II consists of the discussion of some concepts basic to archeology and
the presentation of a series of practical procedures for archeological research.
While Part I is to an appreciable extent destructive criticism, Part II is designed
to be constructive. A more specific and detailed preamble will be given in the
Introduction to the section itself.
     But it must be emphatically stated and continually remembered that although
 there are two parts to this study there is but one conceptual whole. Both parts
 together express a single theory of archeology which, in addition to its own
proposals for the future, takes cognizance of the past and the present. At the
 risk of being trite to the professional and overly abstract to others, I have made
an effort to develop a full-rounded picture in the knowledge that no such treat-
 ment exists in the literature today. On the other hand, I am well aware that many
of the ideas are not new. A considerable number of them lie at the base of much
 recent research, especially that of the younger archeologists. In fact, not a few
publications which have appeared since 1942, when I first began to write this
book, have made the present publication less important in one way and more
 important in another: less, because the trend of archeological thought seems to be
 going in the proposed direction and there is less need for radical change; more,
 because an explicit formulation of this trend is needed to bring it into full
 recognition and provide an opportunity for review and criticism.
     To propose a rigid and universally applicable system for the gathering,
    TAYLOR:                    A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 7

    analysis, and synthesis of archeological materials would be impossible as well as
    presumptuous. The handling of such data is too contingent a procedure to be
    amenable to more than a very general systematization. But for this very reason, it
    is all the more important that objectives be visualized and that a firm (if flexible)
    conceptual structure be provided in order that the ever-changing contingencies
    can be met in consistent fashion and with constant purpose. Otherwise, as has hap-
    pened all too often, the practical eventualities will so warp the results, not to say
    control them, that little consistency will be achieved and few acceptable conclusions
    obtained.
        Therefore, the scheme should be regarded as the theoretical foundation for a
    viewpoint, a point of attack, or an approach rather than for a particular method.
    Its most vital aspect consists of a way of looking upon archeological materials and
    problems, not of any set of procedures for handling data. On the other hand, to
    convey this viewpoint entirely in abstract terms would be difficult and perhaps
    impossible. Therefore, I have exemplified it more or less concretely in the form
    of specific criticisms (Chapter 3) and a series of practical procedures (Chapter
    6), both of which however stem from, and are intended to illustrate, a single
    point of view.
        This perspective I have called the conjunctive approach. It stands in contra-
    distinction to that which is currently popular with Americanists in the United
    States and which may be termed the comparative or taxonomic approach. The
    conjunctive approach takes as its first concern the description of the cultures
|   of human groups. It does this by studying the data which are “Conjunctive:
    conjoining, connecting, connective; . . . Serving to connect the meaning as well
|
|
1   as the construction” (Webster’s International Dictionary). It is primarily inter-
    ested in the interrelationships which existed within a particular cultural entity,
|
    while the comparative approach occupies itself primarily with data which have
|| _relationships outside the cultural unit and attempts to place the newly discovered
|


 | material in taxonomic or other association with extra-local phenomena. Although
\
    in a way the two are complementary, I believe that the conjunctive approach is
    basic and offers by far the greatest number of possibilities, while the comparative
    approach is wasteful, is of very narrow applicability, and is often unreliable even
    for comparative purposes.
        However, in the long run, it will make very little difference whether the ideas
    to be put forward here turn out to be rallying posts or targets. If they become
    either, the study will have served its purpose. The really important thing is to
    focus the attention of the archeologists upon the nature of their objectives, their
    practices, and their conceptual tools. This has been tried before, particularly in
    the fine article by Steward and Setzler (1938), but the effort has rolled off the
    archeologists like water off a petrified puddle duck. If only they can be brought
    to be less blissfully extroverted and more introspective about what they are
       8

                                                                                    . The
       actually doing, I believe that the greatest obstacle will have been overcome
                                                                              the realities
       concreteness of much of their material perhaps has blinded them to
                                                                                        rk
       of less “objective” data and the essential functions of a theoretical framewo
       for their pursuits. Nevertheless, if by chance it has been forgotten, they   should
       be reminded that their results should depend at least as much upon the work of
       their minds as upon that of their spades.

                                        THREE PREMISES

           In the following pages, I shall use the concepts theory, method, and technique
       according to the definitions stated by Kluckhohn in his paper on The Conceptual
       Structure in Middle American Studies:

pelt
       meeethe category theory, refers to the conceptual framework of a single discipline; the
       category) method fefers to the sheer analysis and ordering of data (as opposed to the
       formulation of abstract concepts in terms of which such ordering is carried on); . .
  _Technique is distinguishable      from method    only in so far as /method involves the
 | interrelations and consistency of a number of techniques. For example, archaeological
    method encompasses a number of techniques such as surveying, photographing, field
  | cataloging and the like. (1940, pp. 43-44)

                            A Worp    on NOTES     AND   BIBLIOGRAPHY
           The reader will discover that there are no footnotes. The text has been written
       to be read without interruption and is intended to stand on its own without
       recourse to supplementary evidence. What notes there are will be found in a
       separate section at the end of the text. They are included only for the curious
       and the critical and need not concern the general reader. They consist of additional
       quotations and references and, in one or two instances, some additional examples
       whose inclusion would have made the text overly encumbered. I promise the
       general reader that he will miss nothing if he omits them altogether and that, if
       he bothers himself with continual eye-shiftings and page-turnings, it will be of
       his own doing. I have tried to save him these customary inconveniences.
           Documentation in the form of bibliography and quotation has been made
       extensive for two reasons. The first is that I feel there may be some argument on
       certain points, and I wish to give my sources now rather than in the shape of a
       rebuttal. The second is that I have done considerable library work in preparation
       for writing this book and I believe it would be a boring waste of time for others,
       in the future, to have to plod through as many stacks as I did in search of merely
       the same set of references. If others can build on the bibliographic foundations
       of the present study, they will be able to spend their time in more profitable and,
       I am sure, more enjoyable enterprises.
           Citations have been arbitrarily ended with the year 1945, Coverage had to
       end some time if I was ever to complete the manuscript, and so when I began the
TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                   9

final draft on January 18, 1946, I decided to include no publications issued there-
after. However, I have used J. O. Brew’s monograph on Alkali Ridge (1946)
because it is so pertinent and so parallel in certain respects that to have omitted
it would have been much to the detriment of the present study as well as cause
for suspicion that I might be dodging an issue. Furthermore, I have included
Thompson’s paper on Maya tobacco, published in 1946, because of its unique
status among the publications of the Carnegie Institution. To have overlooked
it might have appeared like an unfair selection of evidence. Because of the date-
line, I have been forced to slight two papers which I regard very highly and which
are very much to the point of this discussion. I refer to Kroeber’s article on
History and Evolution (1946) and Lewis and Kneberg’s Hiwassee Island (1946),
possibly the best archeological report I have had the pleasure of reading.

                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
     The ideas projected in the present study were given their first formal ex-
pression as a doctoral dissertation presented to the Faculty of Harvard University
 in the winter of 1943. I wish to thank that body and especially the Faculty of the
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology for permission to
expand and publish this material.
     Most of the re-working and elaboration has been done under a Post-war
Fellowship in the Humanities granted by the Rockefeller Foundation. I wish
to express my thanks to that organization for its generosity and understanding
foresight in making available the opportunity to take up again what the war so
rudely interrupted. However, my initial debt and possibly the greatest for that
reason, is to the friends who proposed my name and carried through all the
arrangements while I was considerably occupied and not a little incommunicado
overseas. Their modest reticence and/or my stifling gratitude has prevented
me from learning all their names, but to Henry Collins, Clyde Kluckhohn, Frank
Setzler, and all others who had a part in handing me such a home-coming, I can
only say thanks—and mean it.
     So many people have read these pages, in one form or another, that it would
be extravagant to name them all and thank them individually for their truly great
help. However, certain ones have had such a hand in this undertaking that I would
be ungrateful if they were not personally thanked here. First and foremost of these
is Clyde Kluckhohn, who has battled against my foolishness on so many occasions
and for my viewpoint on so many others that A Study of Archeology would not
be in existence had it not been for him. Professor Tozzer has also taken a personal
interest in its welfare and has, in more ways than a score, been a factor of en-
couragement and counsel. Lyndon Hargrave probably started the whole thing
by the stimulation of his free-flowing ideas on the archeology of northern Arizona;
this volume would have profited if I had taken notes during some of those long
10


winter evenings in Flagstaff. I feel, although I cannot be explicit, that Cornelius
Osgood is responsible for much of the manner in which I look upon archeology ;
the discussions, not to say arguments, in which we engaged during the years from
1931 to 1936 keep coming back in many forms and in many contexts. I wish to
thank W. H. Kelly and J. Charles Kelley for their hours of debate and pages of
correspondence whereby a great number of points were clarified by being brought
into the open and subjected to criticism with no holds barred .
    I can do no less than to offer my sincere thanks to those who have given me
detailed or written criticisms: J. O. Brew, Erik Reed, Maurice Ries, Paul Reiter,
F. H. H. Roberts, Jr., F. M. Setzler, Leslie Spier, W. S. Stallings, Ruth Underhill,
W. R. Wedel, Gordon Willey. I should make special mention of the kindness
of Professor Crane Brinton, who read the section dealing with the analysis and
definition of history.
    The share which my wife has had in this undertaking is not to be measured in
words. I cannot begin to tell my appreciation of her role of Devil’s advocate and
her long hours of tedious work. I can only hope that our joint effort is worthy
of her patience and devotion.
                                   CHAPTER 1
                   THE DEVELOPMENT OF ARCHEOLOGY
O NE OF the first things that strikes the observer of archeology as a discipline,
   whether in the United States or abroad, is the persistent and rather sharp
separation between the Classical and Near Eastern fields on the one hand, and
those fields which are tilled under the banner of anthropology on the other. In
the United States, the two are so divorced with respect to academic and learned
society affiliations, personnel, and the channels of publication that one is apt to
forget the fact that they are both given the label of a single discipline.?
     Whether this separation is a superficial, historical fact of no immediate
significance or whether it is indicative of some fundamental split in the theoretical
structure of archeology constitutes a problem which is of considerable consequence
for the present discussion. Therefore, I propose to give a brief outline of the
chronological development of archeological research, whereby both the historical
and theoretical import of this intra-disciplinary distinction will be clarified. To
begin our study in this fashion has the added advantage of leading easily and
logically into the major topic: the theoretical framework of Americanist arche-
ology in the United States.
    The lineal and continuous development of antiquarianism, from which modern
archeology has developed, began with the return of Humanism to Italy at the
close of the Middle Ages. Although such men as Pausanias and the Venerable
Bede, many years earlier, had studied their local antiquities, these men represent
isolated instances cut off by a void of considerable time from the continuum which
culminates in the discipline of archeology. But beginning with Petrarch and
Poggio Bracciolini in the late 14th and early 15th centuries, that interest in the
antiquities of Italy and Greece which was to lead to formal antiquarianism
burgeoned into full flower.”
    In the year 1453 the Turks captured Constantinople. Whatever had survived of the
civilization of the Greeks thereupon fled toward the West and was given a refuge in the
universities of Italy and France and Germany. . . . This was a tremendous boon to
the study of archaeology, for now the people of the West were at last able to decipher
those Greek texts that had been a closed book to them for almost two centuries.
Archaeology suddenly became the favorite pastime of the rich... .
    Indeed, it was during this age that the word “‘dilettanti’’ was coined to describe
a person who “delighted” in the fine arts. All over Europe these dilettanti were laying
the foundations for those vast and often unwieldy collections of statues and pots and
pans and coins and ancient jewelry which afterwards developed into some of our best
known museums. (Van Loon, 1937, pp. 19-20)

    In Italy under the Popes, antiquarian research flourished. Pius II (1458-
1464) was a devotee of Roman relics; Alexander VI (1492-1503) initiated
                                          11
12


excavations in Rome; Raphael is said to have sought the Pope’s aid to protect
the ancient remains, fearing the destruction and dissipation of those that yet
survived.*
     While the initial impetus which set these men of the Italian Renaissance
on such a path of investigation was their newly awakened pride in the glories
that had been Rome, it seems that this soon gave way, at least in the major
part, to an interest in ancient literature, art, and architecture. This emphasis
upon the artistic aspect was especially marked among the French and German
antiquaries, whose background provided them with little or no local or national
sentiment for things Roman or Greek. Thus from the Renaissance until
Schliemann demonstrated the pre-Hellenic cities of the Aegean, antiquarianism
in the region of the Mediterranean, Classical and otherwise, was to a large
extent dominated by the vindication of literary legends and the search for art
treasure. Art and literature were prime movers in the general scramble for
Greek, Roman, Egyptian, and Near Eastern loot. Wincklemann, considered by
some to be the founder of archeology, made his major contribution in the
field of art.t In addition, philology entered the field of “Mediterranean” studies
toward the end of the 18th century and further divorced antiquarianism from
its sentimental and humanistic attachments to local Greek and Roman history.
The classification of human groups occupied much thought during the 18th
and early 19th centuries and language, as Boas has said (1904, pp. 517-518),
offered pertinent and obvious data that, furthermore, were easily obtained. In-
scriptions were sought among the ancient ruins, and philology became an im-
portant factor in the development of antiquarianism.® Schliemann modified all
this, but before it will be profitable to inquire into his contribution, the develop-
ment of archeology in other quarters of Europe will be discussed.

     It appears that formal, historical antiquarianism, as apart from dilettantism
and the study of art, had its origin in England. It is not to be doubted, however,
that these English beginnings were influenced, if not initiated, by the late and
peripheral effects of the Continental Renaissance. Although the Irish may have
created a college of antiquaries as early as 700 B.C. (American Antiquarian
Society, 1820), the first society of English antiquaries was founded in Lae.
only shortly after these effects can be clearly observed in English life. It seems
hardly coincidental that the founders of this society were eminent historians
and students of the classics, who have been claimed as the first historians of
England.* At approximately the same time, England felt the impact of the
Reformation, which involved her in civil strife and doubly affected the growing
historicism. In the first place, the civil unrest caused James I to disband the
nascent society of antiquaries fearing that it might be a haven of political
intrigue. But in the second place, Kenneth Clark has stated that
TAYLOR                       A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                   13

Perhaps they [the antiquaries]     owe their origin to the Reformation, for they saw
monasteries destroyed and libraries dispersed, and were moved to perpetuate their
vanishing glories. Though there seems little of the crash and swagger of Elizabethan
patriotism in these dull volumes, yet they too were written for patriotic ends, and
boasted their country’s treasures as poets did her wars. ... A small circle of antiquarians
grew up, having its centér in the Bodleian library, and from 1660 onwards there is a
steady flow of County Histories and Local Antiquities. (1928, pp. 19-20)?

    The Society of Antiquaries of London was re-founded in 1717, and in 1734
the Society of Dilettanti was organized by men directly influenced by travel in
Italy and by Classical art. Thereafter antiquarianism rose with the rising crest
of the Romantic Movement characterized in England by the literary rebellion
of Macpherson, Gray, and others, against the preceding austerity of the
Reformation and Neo-classicism.? While it may be true, as Lowell has said
(1870, p. 158), that the Romantic Movement started with Lessing (e.g.,
Minna von Barnhelm, 1767; Wie die Alten den Tod gebildet, 1769), neverthe-
less it seems that Lessing himself was influenced by British Romanticism,
especially by Macpherson’s Ossianic poems (1761-1765). The latter, though
perhaps the first true Romanticist of the period, was in turn but one sample
of a general reactionary trend against the literary figures of the days of Pope
and Dryden. Thomas Gray probably best characterizes the first phase of this
trend, and we see in his poems the beginnings of the typical Romantic concern
with the past and ancient, the weird, and the ruinous:
                       Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
                       The moping owl does to the moon complain
                       Of such as, wandering near her secret bower,
                       Molest her ancient solitary reign.

                       Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree’s shade,
                       Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
                       Each in his narrow cell forever laid,
                       The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
                                        (Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard, 1751)

This concern, in its most violent form, appears as the guiding spirit of the
horror-romantic novels of Walpole, Beckford, Radcliffe at the end of the 18th
century. It is significant that the first of such writers was Gray’s best friend,
Horace Walpole, the author of Castle of Otranto (1764). “By now Archaeology
and Romanticism walked hand in hand, familiar twin figures in the English
scene.” (Piggott, 1937, p. 36)
     Another factor came to the aid of the developing antiquarianism. For the
first time in human history, the innumerable implements of stone that had been
found throughout England and elsewhere were popularly recognized for what
14


they really were—the remains of ancient times before man knew the use of
metal. As early as the time of Lucretius (ca. 98-55 B.C.) and later in the
writings of Mercati, Dugdale, Plot, Mahudel, the true nature of stone artifacts
had been surmised. But it remained for the evidence gathered by the explorers
and colonists of the 17th and 18th centuries to establish in men’s minds the
identity of stones as human implements. This same evidence, it should be noted,
constituted the foundation of much of the social and political philosophy of
the Age of Enlightenment in France. The writings of Lafitau, Montesquieu,
Goguet, the German Eccardus were replete with references to the savage mode
of life and, with their appeal to the intelligent layman, served to disseminate a
knowledge of the stone and other artifacts of “natural,” “primitive” man.*° No
longer were the “thunderstones” and “elf-arrows,” as celts and projectile points
had been called, merely curiosities with an esoteric charm; they were the actual
tools, the objects of daily use belonging to an ancient people. They were, there-
fore, new grist to the antiquarian’s mill; they were true relics and not natural
curios; they belonged to the same category of national antiquities as did the
Gothic and Norman ruins and the metallic remains of bygone days, that had
long been recognized and properly identified. The antiquarian field had been
extended farther into the past and the “elf-arrows” tied to national history.**
     By the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th century, there appeared
yet a third aid to antiquarianism in Britain. The Gothic Revival, stemming as
it did from the Romantic Movement and the developing interest in past times,
tremendously stimulated the already blooming study of architectural and other
ruins which covered the English countryside. “Above all the antiquarians made
Gothic ruins their quarry; they were the chief conveyors of Gothic sentiment”
(Clark, K., 1928, p. 19). The wave of medievalism which spread over the
land and which was reflected in the novels of Scott and his lesser contemporaries
created a setting in which the antiquary flourished.’”
     Somewhat opposed to these forces but nonetheless supporting the growth of
antiquarianism, another social reaction made its appearance at this time. With
the start of the 19th century, the Industrial Revolution came upon England.
As Crawford has pointed out (1932, p. 170), the development of a leisure class
and the formation of newly propertied families, both functions of the industriali-
zation of England, provided the human minds and energies for the study of
those mysterious non-essentials which so intrigued the age.
The 40’s and 50’s saw the beginnings of that most English of all institutions, the local
archaeological society, which with its lectures and excursions played so important a part
in the leisured life of Victorian England and which is today the backbone of our local
archaeological research. (Piggott, 1937, p. 37)
But it remained for Pitt-Rivers, in the last half of the century and under the
influence of another discipline, to set antiquarian pursuits in England on the
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               15

road to formal archeology, meaning by the latter a recognized profession
displaying a sense of problem and a definite attempt at accuracy in excavation
and recording (Pitt-Rivers, 1869, 1887-1898).
    From this summary treatment of the genesis of British archeology, one
thing should be very obvious: British archeology grew out of a romantic
interest in local and ‘national antiquities. The ruins and the relics which
occupied the people were conceived as representing the ancient mysteries and
past population of their own land, of their own forebears. Their own medieval,
Anglo-Saxon, Roman, and pre-Roman heritage was the vitalizing factor in their
endeavors. And it is an important fact that these early antiquarians and later
archeologists were fully aware that their investigations pertained to a segment
of their own history which, in many cases, antedated written archives and other
literary sources.*®
    In France, there is a very similar development of archeology. The first men
who extensively concerned     themselves   with antiquarian studies, Peiresc (1580—
1637), Spon (1647-1685), and Caylus (1692-1765), treated primarily of Greek
and Roman materials. After this period of Classical interest, there grew up,
influenced by British activities, a group of Celtophiles who were instilled with a
pride of their national entity and local districts and who thus created a counter-
balance to the predominantly Classical orientation of French academic: anti-
quarianism. La Societie Royale des Antiquaries de France sprung, in 1814,
from a reorganization of L’Academie Celtique which had been founded in 1804.
In 1810, questionnaires had been sent from the Ministry of the Interior to the
prefectures of the country requesting information on local antiquities, and in
1818 a commission was formed to investigate:
    . all the national monuments . . . the Gallic, Greek, and Roman antiquities, the
vestiges of the ancient roads, the mile stones, etc. (Reinach, 1898, p. 294)

Although this committee failed to achieve its purpose, it was indicative of a
nationalistic trend that others continued."*
    A third and similar development took place in Central Europe. Up to the
middle of the 18th century, Czech antiquarianism seems to have been little
more than the collection of artistic objects. But during the last half of the
century, there appeared symptoms of the Romantic Movement and from that
time forward publications were issued on antiquities as national, rather than
purely artistic, treasure. It was not until the middle of the 19th century, how-
ever, that extensive and active work was undertaken, and it was not until 1874
that excavation with a problem, nationalistic and historical, began. This shift
to archeology, as opposed to antiquarianism, was probably due to influence
from outside the country, especially from Denmark.*®
    The development in Germany was slow to take on a national tone, possibly
because of the lack of national unification within Germany itself or possibly
16


because of the strong artistic tradition started by Wincklemann, but neverthe-
less strange in view of the flourishing Germanic Romanticism and local National-
ism. A Gesamtverein der Deutschen Geschichte- und Altertumsverein was
organized in 1852, but as late as 1879 Kohn and Mehlis complained that too
little attention was being paid to early German history. (1879, pp. 1-2)*°
     In Scandinavia, nationalistic antiquarianism evolved directly from a his-
torical interest, with but little if any dependence upon Romanticism. In Sweden,
it dates from the time of Charles Gustavus (1654-1660). In Denmark a society
was founded in 1792 and a commission appointed to investigate the history,
natural history, and geology of the country. The results of this commission’s
work led to the formation of the Royal Danish Museum of Antiquities, and
from this institution, through the efforts of Thomsen, Worsaae, and Steenstrup,
came the concept of archeological stratigraphy, probably the most basic concept
in the theoretical structure of the discipline.*’
     Before leaving the historical and nationalistic aspects of the development
of archeology, we may turn once again to the Mediterranean area. There, the
Greek and Roman researches had so held the attention and overshadowed other
fields that little had been accomplished along other lines of antiquarian investi-
gation. Artistic and architectural incentives still influenced the work, and to
these had been added philology and comparative religion—until 1871.
Then Heinrich Schliemann realized his lifelong ambition to test with the spade the
tradition that Homer’s “City of Troy” underlay the ruins of Graeco-Roman Ilium . .
this archaeological evidence [that it did in fact underlie the ruins] provided a fresh
and independent background of prehistoric periods of culture. . . . (Myers, 1930,
p. XXvi)

From these discoveries it became evident that just as modern European art and
civilization were, in a measure, founded upon Rome and Greece, so the latter
were founded upon other sources. The flowering of archeological schools at
Rome and Athens in the period directly following Schliemann’s excavations at
Troy may be taken as an indication of the effect of his work. The Mediterranean
basin and the Near East were recognized as the cradle of Western European
culture. That same interest in their own past and in the origins of their own
culture, which had spurred the national antiquarians, led European archeologists
into the Classical and Near Eastern fields. While art and architecture were still
potent inspirations, European history in the guise of culture origins and de-
velopmental sequences had been added to the incentives of exploration. “Archae-
ology then came to the rescue of history from the morass into which philology
had dragged her” (Hall, 1915, p. 1). Classical antiquarianism, after an in-
terim of some centuries of ministering to other disciplines, had returned as
archeology   to the historical   fold, not as local history this time but as the
background    of Western   European    civilization.18
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              17

    It is now time to anticipate the argument, toward the establishment of
which the preceding pages and those immediately to follow are directed. It has
been shown that until about 1860 the excavation of ancient remains had been
pursued principally for two reasons: art treasure, and local and _ national
history. But in the years between 1860 and 1875, what had once been rather
formless dilettante antiquarianism became a formal profession and split into
two segments. Classical and Near Eastern archeology continued their long-
standing affiliations with philology and art, and further extended their con-
nections into the realm of history. It was the growing discipline of cultural |
anthropology which absorbed the other segment of European archeology. The |
context and significance of these changes will be more fully elaborated following
the next section of the present chapter.

     There was a second line of archeological development. The establishment of
pre-Neolithic archeology (hereinafter designated as “Paleolithic”) can be -
attributed to geology and its affiliate paleontology. It was founded by a man
primarily interested in paleontology; it was admitted to professional considera-
tion on the word of geologists; and for the first few years of its formal existence
it was pursued primarily by geologists and paleontologists.
     Some of the reasons for this may be inferred. Paleolithic artifacts offer slight
satisfaction in themselves to persons romantically or artistically inclined. Their
romance lies in their age, not in their appearance. Therefore, since the great
age of the Paleolithic finds had not been determined or even vaguely imagined,
it is small wonder that the crude implements should have been overlooked or
relegated to the status of natural or supernatural curiosities by the antiquarians
of the Romantic Movement and Gothic Revival. Their interest was in the
artistic, the bizarre, the historical past, not in the meaning of rough flints. Even
after the stone implements of Neolithic and later times had been accepted for
what they actually were, Paleolithic implements remained unidentified.’
     A second factor in the lag of Paleolithic research was religious in nature.
The Church and the Christian chronology stood directly in the path of an
understanding of the meaning of deeply buried and very crude stone objects.
Archbishop Ussher, a member of the first antiquarian circle in Britain, had
pronounced the world to have been created in the year 4004 B.C. This date was
accepted as the studied judgment of an erudite Man of God and consequently,
on pain of incurring the Church’s wrath, all calculation as to human antiquity
had to be fitted into the time-scale thus erected. Criticism was flatly denounced
or was rebutted by re-assertion, as when Lightfoot retorted that not only was
the world created in 4004 B.C. but at nine o’clock on the morning of October
23 of that memorable year! Furthermore, since the patently high civilization of
Egypt and the relatively sophisticated culture of Biblical Abraham filled prac-
   18


   tically the whole of this Christian chronology as stated by Ussher, there remained
   no frame of reference into which the idea of primeval antiquity could fit. Despite
   an occasional brilliant insight by such men as Vosius and Sir Walter Raleigh,
   it appears that there was no conception of a stage in human history at which
   objects of Paleolithic crudity would have been used as the only implements of
   mankind.”°
   The        force that eventually resolved this intellectual stalemate was the
  English Industrial Revolution. The great churning of swamps, the building of
  buildings, the digging of canals, the cutting of railroad beds provided mag-
  _nificent and entirely new opportunities for observation of geologic phenomena
  (Crawford, 1932). From the time of “Strata” Smith onward, the discipline of
   geology progressed by leaps and bounds. By 1830, Lyell had laid the ground-
   work of modern geology, and by 1834 Agassiz was on the trail of his theory of
    Pleistocene glaciation. Together with the growth of geology came the gradual
    weakening of the biological theory of Catastrophism, which had, at the end of
    the 18th century, partially supplanted the theory of Special Creation held by
    Church and layman alike since the days of Father Suarez.**
        With the publication of The Origin of Species in 1859, the concept of
    progressive evolution within a geological time of tremendous duration re-
    placed Catastrophism, and the stage was set for the acceptance of the antiquity
    of man.
pe     It was paleontology which served as the ultimate catalyst to formulate
a |Paleolithic archeology /from antiquarianism and the discipline of geology.
  “During the first stages of the Industrial Revolution, the same churning of the
   land which assisted geological studies also sectioned vast numbers of Pleistocene
  deposits and brought their contents to light. The earth literally opened before
   the eyes of the new and energetic antiquarian societies which thereupon
   included the bones of ‘“‘antediluvian” fauna in their repertory of collected items
   pertaining to the mysterious past. Paleontological researches boomed and a
   tremendous amount of fossil bone was recovered. Activity and controversy
   prospered, especially in England and France as witness the writings of Lamarck,
   Cuvier, Geoffroy St. Hilaire, Deshayes, Brongiart, Lyell, Pengelly, Buckland,
   and others.
        As part of this trend, Boucher de Perthes of Abbeville on the Somme was
    studying the alluvial gravels of his local river terraces. By 1836, his paleontologi-
    cal investigations had led him to wonder whether the remains of some “ante-
   diluvian” form of man-like creature, or at least his implements, might not be
    found together with all the other mammalian       remains   which   themselves   were
    not so very dissimilar from existing modern forms. In 1847, the first volume of
    Boucher’s Les Antiquités celtiques et antediluviennes appeared. In this work
    he put forward, with his evidence, the contention that his finds represented
    the handicraft of “antediluvian” men. Although a few of his colleagues grad-
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              19

  ually became convinced of the correctness of his views, the general reaction
   to his publication was either indifferent or hostile. But in 1858, the British
   paleontologist Falconer saw Boucher’s collection of flints and was greatly
   impressed. The next year Falconer prevailed upon other British geologists,
   Lyell and Prestwich, to visit Abbeville and see for themselves the sites from
  which the artifacts had been taken. When these eminent scientists, as the
   result of their inspection, became fully convinced of the authenticity of
   Boucher’s finds, the future of Paleolithic archeology was secured. Lyell, the
   most influential of the geologists, still held some of his views on Catastrophism,
   but: the evidence brought forward by Darwin in that same year of 1859 con-
  vinced him of the true meaning of the terrace gravel artifacts of Abbeville. In
   1863, he published his work The Antiquity of Man. This was the final victory
  needed to clinch the position of Paleolithic archeology. The final authority was,
   then, geology. It was in this field, or related sub-field, that Boucher’s ideas had
   their first inception, their first trials, their first acceptance, and their first
  intensification. For, following the recognition of the Abbeville finds, paleon-
   tologists and geologists in Britain and on the Continent began intensively to
  search the glacial gravels and ancient caves for traces of early man.”?
       However, this geological affiliation was short lived. Just as part of historical
__antiquarianism had been absorbed by cultural anthropology, so the investigation
  of ancient man and his culture was also drawn toward that growing discipline.
  “Prehistory,”or ‘Prehistoric Archeology,” retained strong connections with,
 _geology and ee               to be sure, but academically and in general viewpoint
  it seems to have associated itself with the fanthrepalogical rather than the
 (Classical branch jf what was then, and is today, called archeology.

       Thus, of the two lines through which archeology had developed, the Paleo- )
_ lithic gravitated toward cultural anthropology, and the historical split in two. I
 _
 The archeology of Classical and Near Eastern civilization was either retained.
 "by long-standing disciplines such as Classics, Philology, and Art, or was ab- |
_ sorbed by the discipline of History as contributing to the sources of Western|
   European civilization. The other part of the historical segment.was absorbed||
   by anthropology. The explanation for this shift of disciplinary affiliations is to
 “be found in the growth of cultural anthropology.
       From the days of the Age of Exploration, through the social and political
  philosophies of the Enlightenment, men in Europe had become increasingly
   aware of the customs of mankind, particularly those of non-European peoples.
   By the beginning of the 19th century, the study of human customs had
  become an important field of scholarly endeavor. The relationships, physical
  and cultural, between the varieties of the human species constituted problems
  about which speculation and armchair philosophy occupied ever more man-
  power and printer’s ink. The masses of data collected by explorers, colonists,
 20


  and missionaries contributed greatly to the knowledge of, and interest in, the
  strange practices of strange peoples in strange places. Ethnological societies
  were founded and treatises were written upon culture and environment, culture
  and physical man, culture and human psychology, one culture and another, the
  significance of folk tales, etc.”
       But these efforts seem to have been little organized. Other than a general
  interest in custom and the newly appreciated varieties of mankind, especially
  the bizarre and foreign, there seems to have been no central theme, no structural
  framework or single guiding concept around which all these scholars could
 ,rally or against which they could inveigh/ It was Darwin’s theory of biological
 ‘evolution that changed this. It provided the required rallying point, and the
 ‘result was the creation of the formal discipline of Ethnology or Cultural Anthro-
| pology: with the purpose of elucidating the evolution of human custom,
       Two consequences followed the acceptance of Darwin’s theory as applicable
  to cultural phenomena: first, Western European civilization came to be viewed
  as the culmination or acme of an evolutionary process; and second, the con-
  temporary but non-literate cultures came to be considered “survivals” or living
  fossils, representing the stages through which individual culture traits or whole
  cultures had passed in their evolutionary progress. From this, it followed that,
  to those scholars interested in culture, the modern and literate civilizations lost
  their attraction. The elucidation of the evolution of human custom was to be
  effected, not through study of its final forms, but through the study of those
  cultures which represented the developmental stages. Thus it came about that,
  rallying around the concept of evolution, those men who had already been
  interested in culture intensified their researches among the “primitive” and
  non-literate peoples, and their studies became crystallized into a formal disci-
  pline: Cultural Anthropology.
       It should be emphasized at this point that the primary interest of these
  ethnologists had been, and still was, culture. That they believed the “primitive”
  to be their best source of information was due, not so much to their predilection
   for the savage as such, but rather to the assumptions stemming from their
  acceptance of the evolutionary doctrine. Their primary interest, as it had long
  been, was still the relations, the nature and workings, of the varieties of human
  custom. Their preoccupation with the “primitive” and non-literate was a means
   to an end, not the end itself.
       Thus I would modify Kroeber’s interpretation (1923, pp. 1-2) of the course
  of anthropological development. Rather than have cultural anthropology, as
  he does, slyly entering the scene and beginning to cultivate a corner or modestly
   turning its attention to subjects untouched by established disciplines, it would
   seem better to picture cultural anthropology as developing from the organiza-
   tion, around a single basic conception, of men already engaged in the cultiva-
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              21


tion of that corner and already interested in those subjects unappreciated by
existing disciplines. In other words, when the concept of evolution struck the
minds of the students of human custom and history, the ethnologists were
sitting just where the lightning fell. Granting as axiomatic a cultural evolution
as then envisioned, it was but a simple, logical step to the theorems that Western
European civilization was the culmination, that “primitive” cultures were survi-
vals, and that those men who knew “primitive” cultures were thus in the best
position to study and define cultural evolution. Those ethnologists who accepted
cultural evolution were naturals to fall into the role of students of “primitive”
man, and from this point the formalization of their studies into a discipline
could only be expected.
     Thus the idea arose in academic and intellectual circles that cultural anthro-
pology meant the study of undocumented cultures in contradistinction to history
which studied cultures with written records. It is hardly to be wondered, there-
fore, that the archeology of non-literate peoples gravitated toward cultural
anthropology. The archeology of literate cultures, as we have seen, suffered a
dispersed fate. Some Classical and Near Eastern archeology was incorporated
in historical studies and some actual excavation was carried on for that purpose;
some continued to be taught and conducted in the field under the banner of
Classics; some is today, academically speaking, still connected with philology
and art. And the significant thing is that it is all labelled archeology.
     Although I am not prepared to argue the actual cdse as applied to English
and Continental archeology, we see here a potential source of theoretical con-
fusion. In the first place, the practice of a profession which is designated by a
single name is carried on under very diverse, even conflicting, auspices. In the ,
second place, cultural anthropology, which was developed by men primarily
interested in culture, has gathered to itself Paleolithic archeology, which started
as paleontology or geology, and non-literate archeology including that of Neo-
lithic, Bronze, and even Iron Age Europe, which has been shown to have
stemmed from interest in local and national history. More will be said on this
subject at a later time.

    We may now take up the development of archeology in the United States.
First, it will be possible to eliminate discussion of the Classical and Near
Eastern field, since its development in the United States has, for present pur-
poses, followed that of Europe. The genesis of Americanist archeology, how-
ever, presents its own picture.**
     From the first European settlement in what are now the United States,
there had been continuous and intense speculation about the origins of the
aboriginal inhabitants.   The range of assumed antecedents of the native popula-
tion and of American culture extended all the way from the “Indians” of
22


Columbus through Persians, Basques, and Welsh, to the Ten Lost Tribes of
Israel.2° These hypotheses were the results of a priori reasoning and poorly
grounded deductions. Very few men during the first years of colonization
observed the living Indian population except over a gun barrel or through the
eyes of exploitation and trade. With the exception of a few missionaries and
evangelists, those men that went most frequently among the natives were not
the ones from whom books upon the subject derived. Still fewer sought to study
pre-Columbian America by means of the spade. Thomas Jefferson’s excavation,
carried out in 1784, is generally considered to have been the first “dirt
archeology” accomplished in the Western Hemisphere. But it is an isolated
instance, and a considerable number of years elapsed before any extensive,
purposeful digging was done.”°
    After the first period of speculation and when, following the close of the
Revolutionary War, settlers began to move across the Allegheny mountains into
the Ohio Valley, antiquarian research in the United States took its first major
step. The colonists and adventurers trailing westward observed the great monu-
mental earthworks in the newly opened region and began to describe what they
saw. From the end of the 18th century, there appears an ever increasing and
more detailed body of information on the antiquities of ‘““The West.” It should
be stated, however, that these reports were primarily descriptive, and descriptive
of only the more obvious features. They attempted little more than plans and
surveys of mounds and earthworks. What few artifactual details made their
way into print did so purely incidentally and secondary to the prevailing con-
cern with monumental and “architectural” features. Speculations as to the
authors of these structures continued, if anything, more intense than before.
The flood of new data provided just that much more material from which to
erect hypotheses. Rafinesque carries his views on the trans-Pacific and Atlantis-
derived peopling of America to extreme limits. Somewhat later, William Henry
Harrison notes the abandonment of the Ohio Valley and argues that the Aztecs
had once occupied this region whence they had set out for Mexico. Bradford
maintained that the nomadic Indians had degenerated from a former uniform,
agricultural level in America, and he traces the origin of the “Red Race” from
Europe, Egypt, Mesopotamia, and other parts of Asia. An interest in the
culture history of the Indians and the peopling of America was the generating
and guiding force in most, if not all, antiquarian thought and effort during the
first part of the 19th century.?’
     As exploration and settlement pushed farther and farther west and especially
when the Mexican War gave access to vast new territories, fresh and more
extensive fields were offered the antiquarian. The first period of expansion into
the Far West brought the same sort of men and resulted in the same sort of
survey and reconnaissance that had characterized the beginnings of antiquarian
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              23

     observation in the Ohio Valley. Nevertheless, the striking and entirely different
     aspects of the ruins provided new material for speculation and further fanned
     the interest in the history and origins of the Indian.28
          About the year 1870, the second major step in Americanist archeological
     development was taken. Up to this time, investigation of American antiquities
     had been characterized by a rambling and coincidental curiosity as to the
     identity of the builders of the remains.2® The history and derivation of the
     “Red Man” had fired the inquiry which, except for such men as Atwater,
     Lapham, Squier and Davis, and Henry Schoolcraft, had been carried out with
     little if any program. Around 1870, researches began to take on an intense and
     diligent character. The Governmental geographical and geological surveys
     brought trained observers and inquisitive men into the field, and these men
     developed their own interest and that of others in the living Indian and the
     vestiges of past life in the areas explored. Having time and the means for
     observation and recording, they produced invaluable data and stimulated study
     in other quarters.*® Archeological surveys and excavations were initiated with
     a definite purpose in mind and were no longer merely for the sake of discovering
     what lay beneath a particular mound of earth or heap of rubble. That this
     purpose had largely to do with excavations to obtain museum collections is
     beside the point. The important thing to realize is that the digging of sites for
     specimens and other information had become an end in itself (Mitra, 1933,
     pec, TX).
          At least some of this new spirit may be attributed to the energies and man-
     power released by the close of the Civil War. Wissler has called this period the
     Museum Period (1942, p. 190), but it is probable that the growth of museums
     and other institutions was alike in its debt to the release following the war and
     to an increase of European influence upon the United States after 1865. It is
     hardly a coincidence that this period also marks the appearance in the United
     States of formal anthropology. At this time, Brinton, Mason, Morgan, Powell,
     and Putnam entered upon their careers as anthropologists.** The founding of
     the Bureau of American Ethnology, the International Congress of Americanists,
     and the Archaeological Institute of America, the organization of the Subsection
     and shortly thereafter of the Section of Anthropology within the American
     Association for the Advancement of Science, the formation of the Anthropological
     Society of Washington (later to become the American Anthropological Associa-
     tion), all reflect the new and anthropological spirit that impinged upon the
     study of American Indians and American antiquities.” From this date onward,
     Americanists in the United States have pursued their research under the banner |
  ~ of the discipline of Anthropology whether they have been working in ethnological |
    or archeological materials, whether upon the living or the dead Indians.
F         Here again we see antiquarianism, starting with interest in history and
24


ending by absorption into the discipline of cultural anthropology. In the case of
the United States, the reasons are even clearer than they were abroad. Ameri-
canists had not even the slight cause for hesitancy which might have assailed
British or Continental archeologists: culture sequences in the Americas did not
end in archives full of written documents which were the recognized field of
the discipline of history. Nor did Americanist archeology deal with the culture
history and ancestors of those who were engaged in its pursuit. It dealt with
culture history, but of the American Indian, of “primitives.” It did not merge
into the history of self-documented societies; its subject matter was “primitive”
from beginning to end. It was therefore and patently anthropological since, by
the time formal archeology had been established in the United States, the
discipline of cultural anthropology had already been recognized as that which
treated of the non-literate and “primitive.”

    Thus we have seen, both in the United States and abroad, that within the
ranks of those who call themselves archeologists there has been a separation: on
the one hand a drift toward cultural anthropology, on the other a persistence
in history, and the latter current has continued to carry eddies of art, the
classics, and philology, fading somewhat in the present day but still persisting
as active elements. The point upon which the archeological stream is observed
to split is the literacy, the ‘‘primitiveness,’ and perhaps the artistic quality of
the subject cultures.
     To men immersed in European art traditions, Greece undoubtedly offers
more inducements than do the mounds of Minnesota. That men excavating in
Egypt should have more of common interest with men excavating in Palestine
than with those digging in Arizona is understandable. That men working in the
Long Barrows of England should separate themselves from those working in
the Roman Forum might be expected. But if, to continue our figure of speech,
the splitting of the current has muddied the intellectual waters of the archeo-
logical stream, then we have cause for concern rather than complacency. Whether
or not this has happened will occupy us next.
                                CHAE
                                   PE              Re?

            ARCHEOLOGY:        HISTORY        OR   ANTHROPOLOGY?

PNG    ene           may be defined in two ways: first by a statement of its
      subject matter, and second by a statement of its aims and objectives with
regard to that subject matter. There are, of course, other criteria that may be
used, but for the designation of scholarly and scientific fields these seem to be
the ones most commonly employed and most satisfying of the usual require-
ments. Thus, for example, geology may be defined as the science having the
earth’s form and composition as its subject matter and aiming to explain the
history, the nature, and the dynamic characters of this subject matter.
    When, however, we come to define the more particular and specific disci-
plines which are subsumed under the heads of the broader fields of study, we
find that each of these two major categories of definition may in their turn be
approached in two ways. The first is direct and explicit: “The subject matter
of physiography is such and such; its aims and objectives are thus and so; and
it strives to derive the following results from the study of its subject matter.”
This, of course, is the clearest and best way. The second method is by implica-
tion, is less clear, and usually begs the question. By this method, a discipline is
stated or implied to be a branch, a sub-field, a part of some other discipline.
The implication is that it has the same subject matter and objectives as the
master discipline to which it pertains, but with some modification or variation
that may or may not be designated. Thus physiography may be stated to be
a branch of geology, and its subject matter and aims are thus implied to be
somehow related to those of geology. Or physiography may be implicated as a
branch of geology by being included in a geological curriculum, a geological
textbook, or a geological periodical. Physiographers are implicated as geologists
when they belong to geological societies and associate predominantly and pro-
fessionally with geologists.
    For the purposes of the remainder of this discussion, I shall arbitrarily
narrow the scope of inquiry to Americanist archeology as conducted in the
United States. Thus the subject matter of archeology, as that concept will be
used hereinafter, will consist of American Indians and Eskimos. About this
subject matter there would seem to be little cause for controversy.
    The case is otherwise with respect to the aims of Americanist archeology.
They have been stated in both the ways mentioned above, i.e., explicitly and
by subsumption. But the point of importance is that there is disagreement in
the aims stated according to the two methods.
   When Americanist archeology has been subsumed under another discipline,
                                        25)
26


it has been overwhelmingly designated as a branch of cultural anthropology.
From the time of Brinton, Powell, and Putnam this has been true.** With
respect to the academic system, Brand (1937) and more recently Chamberlain
and Hoebel (1942) have shown archeology to be consistently included under
this discipline. The contents of the American Anthropologist and the South-
western Journal of Anthropology, from the first to the current issues, reveal in
the regular inclusion of archeological articles the incorporated status of arche-
ology. The membership of practicing archeologists within anthropological so-
cieties and the topics on the agenda of anthropological meetings are further
demonstration of this inclusion. In order not to beat too much upon this rather
obvious point, the words of two Americanists may serve as illustrations:
The two other subsciences in the field of cultural anthropology, namely archaeology and
ethnology. . . . (Linton, 1945c, p. 8)
The term anthropology now stands for the specific science of man. Ethnology,
archaeology, and somatology are merely divisions, or convenient groups of problems
within the scope of this science. (Wissler, 1938, p. xv)*#

It would seem, then, that the aims of archeology, by implication at least, are
related to those of cultural anthropology.
    On the other hand, when the objectives of Americanist archeology are
explicitly stated, it is found that they are consistently said to be historical,
specifically the “reconstruction of history.” There have been other opinions
expressed, to be sure, but these have been significantly few; they have had
no apparent effect upon the writings of the vast majority of archeologists; and
they may be regarded merely as the exceptions which prove the rule.*® The
archeologists, as a group, appear to be consciously driving toward history,
toward the re-creation of the aboriginal past of the Americas. For example:
McKern seems to be in complete agreement that to reconstruct histories is archaeology’s
main job. (Steward, 1944, p. 99)

Since archaeology is a historical discipline which   aims to reconstruct   the past...    .
(Griffin, 1943, p. 11)
Archaeology has two chief aims, the reconstruction of the life of the people in the
past and the arrangement of this life into an historical development. (Vaillant, 1930,
p. 9)
Archaeology, by etymology the study of beginnings, has historical reconstruction for its
objective. (Kroeber, 1937, p. 163)3¢

    Here then, we have Americanist archeology included within the discipline
of cultural anthropology, yet having the explicitly stated objective of reconstruct-
ing history. What are we to infer from this? Are the aims of sub-discipline and
discipline the same; is the aim of cultural anthropology to reconstruct history?
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               27

What is the aim of the discipline of history; is it also to reconstruct history?
And are these disciplines, then, the same thing with regard to objectives? Or is
cultural anthropology more than a reconstruction of history? Is the archeologist’s
concern with history merely indicative of his particular contribution to the
broader aims of cultural anthropology? If so, what is the relation of this con-
tribution to the whole of which it is a part? What is the use to which anthro-
pology as cultural anthropology can put the findings of archeology as history?
    Such questions and a multitude of others are raised by the position of
Americanist archeology in the United States. Aside from this cultural anthro-
pology-history ambivalence itself, the really significant fact is that there has
been no attempt to resolve the discrepancies if they are real, or to discount them
if they are only apparent. Whether this is because of a failure to realize the
condition, or because of a conscious refusal to deal with theoretical aspects of
archeology, or for whatever reason, the situation remains and is indicative of a
positive weakness in the disciplinary structure. With the exception of Kidder,
whose work will be treated in detail in the next chapter, there seems to have
been no archeologist in the United States who has even approached treatment
of this problem. The archeologists state they have been doing history and that
they are anthropologists without an effort to discover the relationships, if any,
between these two fields.*”
    Of course, the crucial question is: What has history to do with cultural
anthropology? If archeology is a branch of the latter and yet is doing history,
there must be some connection or else the archeologists are off on a completely
wrong track. Assuming that they are not, and in order to answer the crucial
question, it will be necessary to define history and cultural anthropology. Once
these disciplines have been defined to our present satisfaction, the answer to
the problem of their relationship will probably be found to have been established
in the process or, at very least, to have become clearly apparent. It may be
expected also that concurrently with the clarification of these problems, the
relationships of archeology to these and other disciplines will be clarified. The
next section, then, will be concerned with answering the crucial questions: What
is history, what is cultural anthropology, what is the relationship between the
two, and finally what light do these findings throw on the nature of archeology?

    As a first step, one claim which has been advanced by each of the separate
disciplines may be eliminated. Neither history nor cultural anthropology, even
when the latter is taken together with the coordinate and conjoint data of
physical anthropology, should consider itself to be the study of man. Neither
is justified in visualizing itself as the particular discipline which is destined to
pull all the innumerable threads of human experience into a single tapestry
with the meaning of every fiber and stitch explained. To weave this fabric, to
23


be the Study of Man, to “reconstruct” the History of Man, Universal History
as it is sometimes called, will require the services not only of historians and
anthropologists, but also of psychologists, biologists, meteorologists, geologists,
chemists, and a host of other specialists in more or less autonomous disciplines.
Man in his entirety cannot, and will not, be understood as a phenomenon iso-
lated from the physical and psychological worlds any more than as a phenomenon
isolated from the social or cultural worlds. The organic foundations upon which
human culture has been developed and the influence of the natural environment
are factors that cannot be ignored when the Universal History of Man is written.
    Thus it is impossible to accept some of the definitions of history and
anthropology (as a whole, combining both cultural and physical aspects) that
have been proposed by their advocates. For example:
History tends to embrace life in the entirety of its aspects and thus to unite all the
special disciplines and all the so-called historical sciences which have sprung from
analysis.   ... (Berr and Febvre, 1937, p. 360)

In its amplest meaning History includes every trace and vestige of everything that man
has done or thought since first he appeared on earth. . . . It is the vague and compre-
hensive science of past human affairs. (Robinson, 1912, p. 1)

The science of history is that science which investigates and presents, in causal
context, the facts of the evolution of men in their individual as well as typical and
collective activity as social beings. (Bernheim, 1903, p. 6)

The anthropologists strike the same note:
. . the time would seem to be ripe for a new synthesis of science, especially of those
sciences which deal with human beings and their problems.
    By its very definition, the science of anthropology makes a bid for this position.
In all English-speaking countries the term is taken to mean “the science of man and
his works.” In Europe the term has been given a somewhat different meaning, being
limited to the study of man’s physical characteristics, but we will adhere to the broader
definition. (Linton, 1945c, p. 3)

The ideal of anthropology is to coordinate all the data concerning man’s culture,
language and anatomy, past and present, with a view to solving the problems of his
origin and the interpretation of his culture. (Wissler, 1938, p. xv)

Anthropology is the science of Man, a master-science. . .. (Penniman, 1935, Preface)3®

    The above quotations, in so far as they are definitions, are identical and
for this reason alone cannot be accepted at their face-value as distinguishing
two disciplines which in actual practice are, and which themselves claim to be,
distinct. These statements do not merely outline the subject-matter of their
respective disciplines, giving later and appropriate qualifications as to the
segment which    their particular aims and objectives delimit. These         statements
TAYLOR                       A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 29

make the bald claim that each discipline is in fact or potentially the Science,
the Master-science, the comprehensive and synthetic Study of Man. While it
may be too much to impugn the breadth of vision of the men quoted above,?®
it is not too much to contend that these quotations, unqualified as they are,
point to a looseness of thinking which is characteristic and indicative. Neither
history nor anthropology can ever be capable, by itself alone, of synthesizing
and understanding the totality of human experience or of being, in a word, the
Science of Man.
     The task of investigating, understanding, and projecting the totality of
human experience is, at very least, a cooperative undertaking. Such a venture
requires information which is to be obtained only from the particular disciplines
which have made specialized studies—physics, chemistry, geology, biology, psy-
chology, economics, political science, sociology, etc., in addition to, and together
with anthropology and history. To assemble and assimilate such a mass of
material is distinctly outside the scope of any one discipline which, at the same
time, is actively engaged in empirical research within its own special field of
human or non-human phenomena. Each discipline may provide its own informa-
tion toward the common project, but by this very token it is effectively pre-
vented from assuming control over the mass of information gathered by the
others. The value of the separate contributions will depend not only upon their
applicability to human problems but also, and as vitally, upon their own
logical and empirical validity. In short, since it is of primary importance for
each contributing discipline to order its own house and to establish the validity
of its own findings, it is not likely, in fact it is impossible, that any empirically
oriented discipline, at the present stage of scientific and intellectual develop-
ment, will have the time or the extra energy, even granting the vision and depth
of knowledge, to perform the far more stupenduous task of ordering the house
of total human experience and writing the Universal History of Man.*°
    It seems that such a task, by its very nature, constitutes the realm of
philosophy. It is for philosophy, and not the specialized and fact-finding dis-
ciplines, to assemble and synthesize and interpret the vast body of relevant data
provided to the cooperative project by those disciplines. In the words of Flint:
Thus, when a department of knowledge is very comprehensive; when it manifestly
cannot be properly cultivated otherwise than in relation to the whole of knowledge;
when it implies, includes, and utilizes a number of special studies or disciplines, them-
selves entitled to be called sciences, the name of philosophy may well be preferred to
that of science as the generic part of its designation. (1893, p. 20)*4

    Kroeber has stated, and very rightly, that history cannot possibly tell what
really happened in the totality of past time, because to do so would take as long
as the happenings themselves (1935a, pp. 547-548). It is obvious, then, that
for any Universal History or Study of Man a selection must be made, an
  30


  essence distilled, which will give an accurate picture of past human experience
  in the absence of the details of every thought and deed. Since random sampling
  cannot, with any assurance, be expected to provide the necessary material for
  the desired “accurate picture,” a conscious selection must be made. Reasoning
  further, it is apparent that any conscious selection with a view to accuracy and
  relevance must be made in terms of what the selector considers to be accurate
  and relevant, i.e., in terms of a conceptual scheme.** Now conceptual schemes
  which attempt to order the mass of data pertaining to an accurate picture of
  the totality of human existence have long been designated as philosophical and
  the men who develop them as philosophers. According to Znaniecki,
  Every thinking man wishes to obtain some understanding of the totality of the
  civilization to which he belongs, compare it with other civilizations, interpret their
  history, discover if possible some guiding lines in the apparent chaos of the whole
  historical evolution of mankind. These interests are as undying and as justifiable
  in their way as the old metaphysical interest in interpreting the whole world of nature
  as some kind of ordered and rational whole. And there is an old and well established
  discipline which satisfies them: it is the philosophy of history. (1934, p. 100)48

      It seems better, therefore, that anthropology and history should provide
  their own material toward the cooperative project of the Study of Man, than
  that both or one should claim to be the Master-science which is to synthesize
  the totality of human experience. Just to the extent that the historians and
  anthropologists are practicing historians and anthropologists, to that extent
  are they not philosophers and should not aspire to write Universal History or
  alone to pursue the Study of Man.

      Having indicated what history is not, I shall proceed now to take up the
  problem of what history is, of what constitutes a definition of history. Two
  premises may be made explicit immediately: first, the term history “as normally
  understood, means human history”’ (Steefel, 1937, p. 307); second, history will
  be used, as is commonly the practice, to denote the history of man as a cultural,
  rather than a biological, being. Therefore in the succeeding exposition, history
  will refer only to the history of cultural man.**
      The term history has come to have four different denotations which may be
  grouped into two divisions: (a) actuality and (b) abstraction. It is absolutely
  necessary to make, and to keep, these distinctions clear before treating of the
  concept and comparing it with other concepts.
       1. The first meaning   falls within the division of actuality and denotes the
   totality of“past actuality,” as Beard calls it (1934, p. 219), without chronologi-_
   cal or sequential implications. Thus it is possible to say: “One of the most
——
   interesting periods of history was—” and mean “One of the most interesting
   periods of the past was—,” without commitments as to particular time or
   TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              31


     order of time. Historians, writing about their subject, usually do not recognize
     this first, broad meaning. While it is, perhaps, of minor usage, it is different
     from the other meanings, is quite frequently used especially by the lay public,
     and therefore I believe should be included for clarity and completeness.
         2. The second denotation, also within the division of actuality, is differen-
__tiated-from the first ‘by aAerie consideration eect                        sequence of
  _ past actuality from the oldest to the more recent.         Thus one may speak of-the 52
   _ history of England and mean “the coming of ‘things and phenomena into being
     or into successive stages and states of being, the flow of occurrences in time.”
     (Flint, 1893, p. 7)
         3. The third meaning of the word history falls within the second or abstract
     division and denotes the exposition, written or verbal, of “what actually hap-
     pened.” It is, as Croce maintains (1921), “contemporary thought” about past
     actuality and particularly this thought set down in writing or somehow projected
     in words. It denotes an abstraction or a set of abstractions from actuality, not
     that actuality itself.
         The word contemporary is used advisedly and with certain connotations
     which will be of importance at a later point in this study. Any segment of past
     actuality which is verbalized, in writing or orally, is not that segment itself but
     merely an abstraction filtered through the mind of the verbalizer. As Cohen and
     Nagel say (1934, p. 324): “History as the knowledge of the past, and indeed
     all knowledge, can be achieved only through inference.” Now it is impossible
     “to infer” or “to filter something in the mind” in the past—or in the future for
     that matter. Thought is synchronous and contemporary with the thinker, iee.,
     with the verbalizer, with the historian. The written or spoken record of past
    _actuality is, then, “contemporary thought” about actuality.
      ~ History in this third sense has sometimes been given the name of historiog-
 _ raphy, literally “the writing of history.” Although there seems to be some
     ambiguity in the use of this term today among historians, it will nevertheless
     be used in the course of this study to denote the third meaning of the word ;
     history, to designate the projection, written or spoken, of contemporary thought|
     about past actuality in terms of cultural man and time sequences. There seems |
     to be no other word or phrase which is applicable, distinctive, and concise.*®
     Thus one may speak of Buckle’s History of Civilization in England and mean
     Buckle’s historiography, the account which projects his thought about that
     segment of total past actuality which embraces the civilization of the people of
     England in its chronological order.
         4. The fourth meaning of Aistory also lies within the division of abstraction
     and identifies the discipline or formal branch of knowledge which is occupied
     in the practice, the teaching, and the study of historiography. Thus one may say:
     “History employs such and such methods” and mean that a certain discipline
 32


 which has to do with historiography employs such and such methods.*°
     It is obvious that “history is both a descriptive record of human events and
 an existential series of events” (Meadows, 1944, p. 53). Meanings (1) and (2)
 denote the “events themselves” according to Shotwell (1922, p. 2). They imply
 the actual happenings about which the abstractions, inferences, and other
 thoughts denoted by meanings (3) and (4) are made. Since the comparisons to
 be effected in this study are between the discipline of cultural anthropology and
 the discipline of history and since the latter has been defined in terms of the
 concept of historiography, it will be possible hereafter to deal only with his-
 toriography and anthropology. The other meanings of the word history, except
 in so far as they are pertinent to a specific argument and are explicitly indicated
 may be eliminated from consideration.
     The so-called historical, non-experimental disciplines which deal with actual,
 non-repeating, unique, rather than “laboratory” events and which include
 historiography, are characterized by four steps or levels in the procedure by
 which they seek to attain their objectives. These steps are roughly, although by
 no means consistently, sequential. They are: first, the definition of problemin
‘terms of a conceptual scheme; second, a gathering, analysis, and criticism of
 empirical data; third, the ordering of these data in chronological sequence;and
 fourth, the search for and,to the extent that it is possible, the establishment of
 “the reciprocal relationships within this series: the continual _ actions and

 of integration and synthesis, of context and so-eiled Fistatieal reconstruction,
 toward which all the historical disciplines are eae ata one is speaking
of geology, astronomy, historiography, or cultural anthropology.
 The essential characteristic of the historical approach is the endeavor to achieve a con-
 ceptual integration of individual phenomena (“‘facts” or “events”) in terms of specified
 time and space. (Forde, 1939, p. 224)

 The ideal of the social historian is to trace the evolution of a people with reference to
 all the conditions and influences that helped to shape its aspirations and its way of life.
 In other words, the social historian seeks to depict the human past at a given period
 in its totality, with the various forces and factors duly interrelated and appraised.
 (Schlesinger, 1937, p. 60)47

     That historiography has aspired to this goal is most evident from the facts
 of its development as a discipline. Since the day that Herodotus, “the father of
 history,” stated his intent of leaving to posterity the details and the cause of
 the Persian War, through Thucydides, Polybius, Augustine, Machiavelli, Gibbon,
 Macaulay, Carlyle, von Ranke, Prescott, Freeman, etc., the grand topic and the
 grand manner typified historiography.
 Its point of view was primarily political. It concerned itself largely with the activities
TAYLOR                       A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  33

and interests of government, political parties, diplomacy, and war. .. . The eyes of
European historians had always been dazzled by the pageantry of kings and armies,
the pomp and circumstance of dramatic occasions. (Schlesinger, 1937, p. 57)

This traditional or ‘“‘academic” type treated, to the virtual exclusion of all else,
of great events and “grand character” (Stubbs, 1877, p. 98), of topics believed
to represent the most worthy achievements of mankind: the Church, the State,
and the Military.*®
     Until the end of the 19th century, perhaps even until the first decades of
the 20th, this brand of historiography prevailed. However, around the turn of
the century, there appeared a feeling for broader subjects, a sensing of the in-
adequacies of past politics as present history, to paraphrase Freeman (1886, p.
44).
The exclusive idea of political history, Staatengeschichte, to which Ranke held so firmly,
has been gradually yielding to a more comprehensive definition which embraces as its
material all records, whatever their nature may be, of the material and spiritual
development, of the culture and the works, of man in society, from the stone age
onward. .. . (Bury, 1903, p. 19)

    This new type may be identified as “social” or ‘cultural’ historiography. It
rejects the dogma of former days, that concern should be confined to princes
and politics, the military and the mighty, and recognizes the importance of the
masses of common people, of everyday life, and of the normal happenings of the
past. Man’s past in all its aspects is the subject matter of this later historiog-
raphy, limited only by the interest, capabilities, and capacities of the individual
student.
Of course in actual practice labour is divided; political history and the histories of the
various parts of civilization can and must be separately treated; but it makes a vital
difference that we should be alive to the interconnection. . . . (Bury, 1903, p. 19-20)

Adumbrations of the “social” historiography had been present since the very
first: Herodotus wrote of Scythian and Aethiopian customs, Tacitus of those of
the Germans, Montesquieu and Voltaire of customs and arts. But it remained
for the growth of science and Nationalism in the early and middle 19th century
to point up the importance of the masses and their culture. From this influence,
first Kulturgeschichte arose and then the New History of Jameson and Robinson
which attained prominence before World War I and flowered thereafter in the
twenties. Of recent date, the so-called “cultural approach to history” is react-
ing against certain tenets and practices of the New History.*®
     In their work, historians have certainly attained the third level of historical
procedure as outlined above. They have been guided into realms of the past by
specific problems and interests; they have gathered and criticized their data;
and they have either worked out their chronology or had it given them by the
  34


  nature of their material. Furthermore, the attainment of the fourth level, that
  of context and interrelation, has consistently been the goal of historians since they
  first began to work. Even in the days when only the grand events and high
; personages were treated, there was a conscious attempt to synthesize the perti-
  nent facts into an integrated picture. From Herodotus and Livy to Gibbon and
» Carlyle, this “picture of the past” was the thing sought after in historiography.
  In fact, it was a reaction against the painting of too highly integrated pictures on
  too little evidence, against the philosophically subjective narratives of historians,
  which brought about the “scientific” and “unbiased” historiography of von
  Ranke. Whatever the technical failings of the earlier historians might have been
  with respect to the first three levels of procedure, it is clearly apparent that they
  were primarily bent upon the attainment of the fourth level, upon writing
  literary narratives which, ipso facto, called for synthesis, interrelation of facts,
  and the development of context and a cultural picture. The school of von Ranke
  and the succeeding Kulturgeschichte were no less interested in synthesis and
  narrative; their difference lay in more rigorous attention to procedure as such
  and, in the latter school, a broader viewpoint. That the resultant syntheses were
  not objective, as the historians so wishfully thought, is beside the point. The
  important thing to note is that they, as those who preceded them, thought of
  their goal as “literary re-creation” of past actuality. It is superfluous to stress
  the fact that modern historiography also is primarily interested in context. Full
  and inclusive context, within the chosen frame of reference, is the very canon of
  its work. Even though, as Shotwell says, “each historian now specializes [and]
  great enterprises of the totality of history are cooperative and even then cover
  only a fraction” (1929, p. 597), the pertinent contexts of these chosen segments
  are recognized to be the bases for valid criticism and valid “reconstruction” of
  past actuality.®°
      One more line of evidence may be adduced to the proof of the contention
  that historiography’s interest lies at the level of integration, of synthesis, and
  context. The commonly accepted distinction between annals and chronicles on
  the one hand and historiography on the other is this very concept of contextual
  synthesis. The former terms are usually defined as temporally sequential records
  of events, while the latter term implies that the data are handled with regard for
  their relationships and mutual meaning. Thought about past actuality becomes
  historiography only when facts are related to one another and a picture is created
  from them by the efforts of the historian. The hallmark of historiographyis its
  concern for the picture of past actuality.®
       Since this is so and since this is what the historians have been doing all along,
  it constitutes the definition for which search has been made. Historiography is the
  discipline characterized by the construction of cultural contexts abstracted from
  the totality of past actuality. More specifically, it is projected contemporary
 TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  35


_
 thought about past actuality, integrated and. synthesized into contexts in terms
_of cultural man and sequential. time.*?
      Before leaving the subject of historiography, two corollaries may be derived
  from this definition. First, being “historical” does not mean having a concern
 merely with time; to have that is being “chronological.” Second, being “histori-
  cal” does not mean having a concern merely with the past; to have that is being
 “antiquarian.”
 Because an event belongs to the past it is not necessarily historical. Indeed, in so far
 as the antiquarian isolates his material for our inspection, interested in it for its own
 sake, laying it out like a curator of a museum, he robs it of its historical character.
 For the facts of history do not exist by themselves any more than the lives of historical
 personages. They are part of a process and acquire meaning only when seen in action. }
.The antiquarian preserves the fragments of the great machinery of events, but the
historian setsit to work again, however faintly the sound of its motion comes to him
across the distant centuries. (Shotwell, 1922, p. 6)
     Finally, before proceeding to the subject of anthropology, it will be well to com-.
 ment on the fallacy and mental hazard engendered by the uses of the term historical
 reconstruction. The words reconstruction and resynthesis are fundamentally er-
 roneous and have been responsible for much loss of confidence, particularly among
 the anthropologists. To quote Pirenne:
 All historical narrative is at once a synthesis and a hypothesis. It is a synthesis inso-
 much as it combines the mass of known facts in an account of the whole; it is a
 hypothesis insomuch as the relations it establishes between these facts are neither
_evident nor verifiable by themselves. (1931, p. 441)
    If, then, only the facts and not their original relationships and interactions are
 subject to verification, it certainly follows that the historical contexts themselves
 are not verifiable. If this is the case and it cannot be told for sure whether past
 actuality has, or has not, been recreated in detail or in essence, it cannot be
 claimed that these contexts are, or are not, resyntheses or reconstructions. These
 terms imply a re-building to exact former specifications which, from the above,
 are not verifiable and, hence, not knowable. The unknowable cannot be taken
 as a standard of value. Therefore, the arguments both for and against historical
 reconstruction in anthropology or in any other particular discipline are irrelevant,
 and it becomes apparent that the work of all historical disciplines really leads to
 construction and synthesis, not reconstruction and resynthesis. From this, it is
 further apparent that the real task of the students in historical disciplines settles
 down to seeing how sound, how plausible, and how acceptable their construc-
 tions can be made. Neither the anthropologist nor the historian should use the
 term reconstruction and thus make himself feel inadequate because he knows that
 his research will never permit him actually to reconstruct the life of past times
 with certainty and completeness. Rather, he should realize that even the contexts
 36


 written from the best and fullest archives are constructions and that the differ-
 ences lie in the nature of the respective data, not in the procedures or basic
 theoretical factors.

      With regard to a definition of anthropology, it may be stated explicity at the
 start that cultural anthropology will be the concept defined. It is outside the
 scope and requirements of the present study to inquire into the objectives of
 anthropology as a whole, meaning both the cultural and physical branches and
 their interrelation. Whether anthropology as a whole has for its objective “the
 interpretation of those phenomena into which both organic and social causes
 enter” (Kroeber, 1923, p. 3) or whether it “aims at understanding the workings
 of human culture, the relations between individual mental processes and human
 institutions, and the biological foundations of human custom” (Malinowski,
 1934, p. xvii) or whether “‘it is the ultimate aim of anthropology to discover the
 limits within which men can be conditioned, and what patterns of social life
 seem to impose fewest strains upon the individual” (Linton, 1936b, p. 5), these
 are questions whose answers lie beyond the range of present needs. Our prob-
 lem here was stated above and is simply: What is cultural anthropology, what is
 history, what is the relationship between them, and finally what is the position
 of archeology in the light of the conclusions thus arrived at?
     When we come to examine the concept of cultural anthropology, we find that
it too, as was the case with historiography, denotes the projection, written or
verbal, of contemporary thought about past actuality in terms of cultural man
 and time sequences. To pronounce so bluntly that it deals with the past may be
 a point of issue to some anthropologists, especially the “functionalists.” But
 Lesser has pointed out (1935, pp. 390ff) that anthropology should deal with the
 past to be sound, and I wish to point out now that it does deal with the past
 whether this is recognized by the functionalists or not. Becker has given us the
 concept of the “spurious present” (1932, p. 226) to designate the fact that any
 study of events or actual happenings must, by the nature of things, deal with
 the past, whether that past be distant by a second, an hour, or a century. Once
 an event has happened, i.e., once it is an event, it is already past. Neither
 functionalists nor other students can study an event until it is an event, until it is
 past.°® Thus, the difference between what the functionalists identify as the
 present and what they designate as the past is merely a matter of degree. Even
 if it is claimed by the functionalists that anthropology should deal with the
 “spurious present” while historiography is said to deal with the “considerable
 past,” the difference is relative and the dividing line so subjective that these
 concepts cannot be used to differentiate distinct disciplines. That cultural an-
 thropology considers its data in terms of cultural man and time sequences is
 taken as axiomatic, requiring no exposition. Time is neither reversible nor able
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 37

to be discounted when dealing with cultural man or any segment of actuality
whose interrelations it is desired to understand.
     Up to this point, cultural anthropology and historiography denote the same
thing. How then can there be a difference between the two concepts? The answer
is, of course, that the definition of anthropology is not complete enough and that
the differences, assuming them to exist, must lie elsewhere than in the realms of
past actuality, sequential time, or the cultural character of man. The investiga-
tion will have to be pressed further if differences are to be found.
     Cultural anthropology, like historiography, is one of the so-called historical
disciplines, being non-experimental and dependent on phenomena which are not
contingent upon “laboratory” manipulation or the activities of the observer. It
is, therefore, characterized by the same four levels of procedure by which all such
disciplines seek to attain their objectives. Ideally, it approaches its material with
a particular interest or a definite sense of problem; it collects, analyzes, criticizes
its data; it sets them in chronological order; and synthesizes them into a con-
text.
   The hallmark of the proper anthropologist, at the present date, is the realiza-
tion of the vital importance of context and of the fact that cultural data, torn
from their setting or without the weighting and balance which context gives them,
are of little or no significance. To this level of procedure, then, both cultural
anthropology and historiography (as well as geology, sociology, and all historical
disciplines) profess to aspire. And while it is a fact that they do not always attain
their goal in this respect and that, actually, they sometimes do not even attempt
to attain it, nevertheless, this realization, this immediate objective, is the recog-
nized canon of the two disciplines. Once more it has been shown that there is
no difference between historiography and cultural anthropology. How, then, do
they differ?
    Since procedure is intimately connected with objectives by being specifically
oriented toward their attainment, it is expected that similar procedure indicates
similar objectives. Are the objectives of the two disciplines, then, the same? They
are—up to the fourth level of procedure, the level of cultural integration and
synthesis. Beyond this they are not. Here, finally, they diverge. Here lies the
difference between them. The manner in which they diverge will be elaborated
below, and by this means it will be possible first to define cultural anthropology
and then to show the interrelation between cultural anthropology and historiog-
raphy.
    The concept of culture has been the greatest contribution which the discipline
of cultural anthropology has made to the cooperative project of the Study of
Man.*‘ Ever since the time when cultural anthropology was first formalized into
a discipline around the concept of evolution, its major interest has been the
elucidation of the nature, the processes, and the development of culture. In
 38


   fact, Teggart has very rightly pointed out in his provocative discussion of the
   theory of historiography (1925, p. 122) that/the early, evolutionist anthropolo-
   gists continuing the line of comparative ‘method stemming from Descartes
ee



   through Comte and Spencer to Tylor, turned to the new concept of culture so
_ wholeheartedly as to neglect, by failing to reach, the vitally important level of
 \_context,/Their belief in parallelism led them, in their fashion, through the first
   three levels of procedure: problem, data, and chronology. But it also induced
   them to stop there in order to investigate individual elements of culture in so far
 as these reflected the current evolutionary ideas.*°
     From its preoccupation with elements of culture and deductive “evolution-
 ary” chronology, anthropology was rescued by Franz Boas. Lowie has described
 Boas’s contribution in the following manner:
 Boas, with a keen sense for differences and for the complexity of social life, was able
 to distinguish like and unlike features. He insisted that before equating phenomena
 we must first be sure of their comparability, which could be determined only from
 their context. (1937, p. 144)

|In other words, he demonstrated the necessity of the fourth level of procedure.
|But     it is also apparent that he advocated this extension of procedure for the
  purpose of getting a better perspective and a better understanding of culture
_ itself. In short, the level of synthesis was sought and demanded by Boas as a
| means to an end; and, just as with the evolutionists, that end was an understand-
 ing of the nature, the processes, and the develcnmest of culture. Thus, after
 establishing the need for a fourth level of procedure, Boas went on to use this.
  as a stepping stone to a fifth level, jone of the study of the nature of culture, of
‘cultural constants, of processes, of regularities, and of chronological development.
  The immediate results of the historical method are, therefore, histories of the cultures
  of diverse tribes which have been the subject of study. I fully agree with those
  anthropologists who claim that this is not the ultimate aim of our science, because the
  general laws, although implied in such a description, cannot be clearly formulated nor
  their relative value appreciated without a thorough comparison of the manner in which
  they become manifest in different cultures. But I insist that the application of this
  method is the indispensable condition of sound progress. The psychological problem
  is contained in the results of the historical inquiry. When we have cleared up the history
  of a single culture and understand the effects of environment and the psychological
  conditions that are reflected in it we have made a step forward, as we can then investi-
  gate in how far the same causes or other causes were at work in the development of
  other cultures. Thus by comparing histories of growth general laws may be found.
  (Boas, 1896, ed. 1940, pp. 278-279)

  Although Boas later qualified his views on “laws,” his interest in process and
  culture itself appears to have remained undimmed.** Once more culture as such
  was the ultimate in anthropological procedure, but this time on a sound rather
  than on an insecure basis.
  TAYLOR                        A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                   39

        But the purpose of Boas’s insistence upon the fourth level, i.e., as a means to
    the attainment of the fifth and important level, was evidently misunderstood by
    not a few anthropologists. His strictures on the necessity of cultural contexts and
    against schematic and tenuous “reconstructions” and “laws” seemed to divert
    attention from culture per se and to concentrate anthropological energy upon
    collecting data, interrelating them, and synthesizing them into accounts of par-
    ticular cultural entities. This and the need to gather the “primitive” rosebuds
    while they might, developed among the anthropologists a certain disregard for the
    problems of culture and of cultural processes toward which cultural anthropology
    had been oriented from Tylor to Boas. More recently, due to the influence of
    such men as Sapir, Malinowski, Radcliffe-Brown, and to what might be called an
    active resurgence of the original Boasian interest in culture itself, the study of
 __the nature, the processes, and the development of culture has resumed its primacy
    in much of anthropological thinking. The analysis and synthesis of particular
    entities has become, as Boas apparently intended it to become, a means to the
    end of a better understanding of culture, its statics and dynamics, its form and
    functioning, and its “history.’’®”
         If the above abbreviated account of the growth and concerns of cultural
    anthropology is correct, it will now be possible to define that discipline in terms
    of its accomplishments and interests. In brief, cultural anthropology is the com-
 _ parative study of the statics and dynamics ofTare its formal, functional, and
   developmental aspects. In contradistinction to sociology, economics, political                Sa
                                                                                                 es
                                                                                                  ae


a science, art, etc., which also study culture, but specific segments of culture, and
    which have limited themselves, with few exceptions, to the modern period and
    to Western European civilization,** cultural anthropology studies culture wher-
    ever and whenever found, restricting itself to no special segment but considering
    the totality as its potential field of research.
         It is often alleged that there is a difference between cultural anthropology
    and historiography on the basis of the literacy and cultural “primitiveness” of
    their respective subject matter. Hulme, a historian, says:
  Anthropology, then, deals with the life of man before history takes up the subject. . .
  [history] begins at the point where the individual can be clearly seen and his doings
  recorded. ... (1942, p. 147)

  Anthropologists also follow this line:
  The so called “primitive” societies which Anthropologists         have made    their special
  field of investigation. . . . (Linton, 1945a, p. xvi)

  Anthropology is, literally, the science of man. .. . its distinctive field, which is entered
  only incidentally by other disciplines, is the realm of preliterate cultures. (Wallis,
  1937, p. 92)
  And finally Robinson, the champion of the New History, speaks of
40


... those investigators—namely, the anthropologists—who deal with the habits, customs,
institutions, languages, and beliefs of primitive man... . (1912, p. 89)°9
It is a fact that cultural anthropologists have in practice confined themselves
pretty well to the study of such peoples. And therefore, it may be perfectly true
that its “special field of investigation” is the so-called primitive. But it would
appear that this preoccupation is the result of historical accident and does not
comprise the fundamental interest of the discipline. As Leslie Spier has often
said: “Anthropology doesn’t mean Indians,” and it doesn’t merely mean “primi-
tives” of any sort. It was mentioned in the first chapter above that the con-
cern of the cultural anthropologists with the “primitive” is traceable to the pre-
suppositions of the early evolutionists. This trend was further strengthened
through the influence from the comparative sociology of Comte and Spencer:
Western European culture was taken to be uniform to all intents and purposes,
and anthropology, therefore, in its trend toward comparative study, turned to
non-European cultures, which, to Europeans, were “primitive.” In recent years,
other reasons have been offered for the study of “primitives”: their culture is
simpler and thus more understandable; ideally it is free of European influence
and hence represents the independent diversity necessary for proper compari-
son; more objectivity is possible when dealing with cultures other than one’s
own, etc.°° Whatever the reasons and whatever their validity, it remained that
the cultural anthropologists have stuck pretty close to “primitive” man.
     But when clear thinking has been done on this topic, this preoccupation has
been viewed purely as a means to an end. One can hardly overlook the fact that
the early evolutionists were interested primarily in culture. As long ago as 1896,
 Brinton disavowed the narrow scope of ethnology (1896a, p. 7) and in 1917
Lowie said:
For purely practical reasons, connected with the minute subdivision of labor which has
become imperative with modern specialization, ethnology has in practice concerned
itself with the cultures of the cruder peoples without a knowledge of writing. But this
division is an illogical and artificial one. As the biologist can study life as manifested
in the human organism as well as in the amoeba, so the ethnologist might examine
and describe the usages of modern America as well as those of the Hopi Indians. (p. 6)
His later reiteration of this point (1936a, p. 301) and Kroeber’s blunt state-
ment that “anthropology has never accepted the adjudication sometimes tacitly
rendered that its proper field is the primitive” (1923, p. 6) are evidence enough
that it was not “primitives” themselves that interested the anthropologists.
    Furthermore, neither cultural anthropology nor historiography has preserved
inviolate this alleged boundary between them. Literate cultures, such as the
Maya priesthood, Arab, and West African, have been reported upon in anthro-
pological journals by avowed anthropologists; while illiterate and non-literate
cultures, such as the Kentucky mountaineers and the African Zulu, have been
 TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              41

 the subject matter for much writing by avowed historians. And today in the
    United States, the foundation of a Society for Applied Anthropology, the use of
    cultural anthropologists by the United State Government in its resettlement and
    food programs and its Japanese relocation program during the late war, the
    strong influence of the Lynds and Lloyd Warner, are but examples of the
    vigorous trend toward the study of our own, hardly “primitive,” and quite literate
    culture by avowed anthropologists using anthropological methods.**
        Thus for a long time on inherent grounds, and more recently and growing
    in practice, there has been a feeling that it is a false dichotomy that separates
    cultural anthropology from historiography on the basis of non-literacy and so-
    called primitiveness of subject matter. It seems, therefore, that there is nothing
    inherent in either discipline to prevent it from dealing with the totality of past
    actuality, literate or not, “primitive” or otherwise. This does not mean, however,
    that either can compass this totality or that either one or the other, or both, can
    claim to be the discipline which alone is operating in this field. Rather it should
    be understood that there is a common pool of source material from which they
    both may draw, with which they both have the potentiality of dealing, from
    which both may abstract any material which suits their special purposes. It is,
    therefore, in these special purposes that the differences between the two dis- |
    ciplines lie. The purpose of historiography has been shown to be the construc- |
 _ tion of cultural contexts, while that of cultural anthropology is the comparative —
    study of the nature and workings of culture.
        In conclusion, it may be of advantage to point out specifically the manner
    in which these definitions interpret the activities of cultural anthropologists and
    historians. It is apparent that historiography is basic to cultural anthropology.®’
_In order to “do” the latter, it is necessary to have done, or to have available, the
_ former, The contexts have to be constructed before a comparative study of cul-
  ture and the history of culture may be begun. Following this reasoning, it de-
   velops that the operation which is called ethnography is really a branch of his-
    toriography and not of anthropology. The confusion that has arisen from
   anthropology’s preoccupation with “primitives” has resulted in an erroneous
   separation of what really are two phases of a single operation: non-literate and
   “primitive” historiography on the one hand, and literate and “advanced” histori-
   ography on the other. It has obscured the real difference, the one between a
   major concern for the construction of cultural contextsand a major concern with
  _culture itself. Only so far as the student makes use of his cultural context for
   the purpose of deriving and comparing cultural abstractions, does he “do”
   anthropology in the present sense. If he stops his investigations at the fourth
   level of procedure with his context, he is not doing anthropology but historiogra-
   phy—whether his subject matter is 18th century England, Blackfoot Indians, or
   an industrial community in Indiana.
42

     This implies another point which should be cleared up here. It can be shown
 that historians have, of recent years, attempted to derive cultural regularities or
 so-called laws from their data.*? Men who call themselves historians have as good
 a prerogative to make such derivations as any other men calling themselves what
 they will. This fact, however, does not negate the contention that in doing so
 these historians are not “doing” historiography. When historians utilize their
 material to study culture itself, they are “doing” cultural anthropology or soci-
 ology or economics, or philosophy of history if their schemes embrace large
 enough segments. Or rather, they are doing what the anthropologists, the soci-
 ologists, the economic theorists, or the philosophers have been doing since they
 crystallized their activities into disciplines.**
     The relations between historiography and cultural anthropology are com-
 plementary: each uses the findings and methods of the other, but to attain
 each their special objective. Mandelbaum has expressed this idea:
 However, the formulation of such principles [historical principles corresponding to
 scientific laws] is not the goal toward which the historian, as historian, strives; on the
 contrary, these principles serve merely as working hypotheses in concrete descriptive
 analysis. It is here that the difference between history and theoretical social science
 emerges. . . . History, as we have shown, depends for the furtherance of its analysis
 upon principles which only sociology and other theoretical social sciences can disclose;
 sociology depends upon historical investigation for the material upon which it works,
 examining and comparing historical instances in order to disclose the laws which may
 be implicit within them. (1938, pp. 264-265)*®

  If the definitions of the present study are accepted, the term cwtural anthro-
  pology may be substituted for sociology in the quoted passage without loss of
  meaning. In short, it seems that the historian studies the nature and workings of
  culture itself as a means to the end of better understanding his unique events and
_thus of better constructing his contexts or cultural pictures. The anthropologist
__constructs historical contexts as the means to the end of deriving sound cultural
  abstractions which will further his study of culture itself.

     Having come to some conclusions with regard to cultural anthropology and
 historiography, we may now turn back to the original problem: what is the
 position of archeology in relation to these two concepts? How is archeology re-
 lated to anthropology and history thus defined?
     To start with, it seems justifiable to state as axiomatic, (1) that archeology.
_deals with past actuality and sequential time; (2) that although it may produce
 data on human biology, its interests lie in man as a cultural being; and (3) that
 it is one of the nonexperimental, so-called historical disciplines. From this last
 axiom it follows that archeology also employs the same procedure which, it has
 been stated, is typical of all such disciplines. Thus, ideally at least, it proceeds
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                43

  from problem, to data, to chronology, to the integration and synthesis of these
  data into a context, in this instance a cultural context.
      Here, then, is the relation of archeology to historiography:
                                                               to the extent that
__ archeological research attains the fourth level of procedure it is to be considered
 _ historiography.    The fact that the archeologist works, for the most part, in what
   Holmes called the “nonintentional or fortuituous records” rather than in the
   “intentional or purposeful records” (1919, p. 1) is no grounds for altering the
   designation of his results. At most, there is a difference in the method and
   techniques required to handle the “unintentional records.”’ Both historiography
   and archeology have the same procedure, and at the fourth level, both have
   reached the same end point. Both may be called “antiquarian” so long as they
   do no more than secure isolated and unrelated information. Both may be termed
   “chronicle” so long as they merely obtain cultural data in chronological sequence.
    Both become historiography, no more and no less, when they interrelate and
   integrate their cultural information into cultural pictures or contexts. One may
   “do” historiography by interpreting the written record (archives, letters, cunei-
   form tablets, Maya hieroglyphs, inscriptions on seals and coins and monuments),
   by interpreting the oral record (informants of non-literate or illiterate peoples,
   oral tradition of literate peoples), or by interpreting “non-verbal documents”
    (stone axes, Greek temples, Toltec pyramids, Hohokam pottery, Magdalenian
   cave art). The important fact is that the moment cultural data are synthesized
   into a context representing past actuality, the result is historiography.
        Archeology’s relation to anthropology may be understood after the same
   fashion. When the archeologist collects his data, constructs his cultural contexts,
— and on the basis of these contexts proceeds to make a comparative study of the
  nature and workings of culture in its formal, functional, and/or developmental
  _aspects, then he is “doing” cultural anthropology and can be considered an
   anthropologist who works in archeological materials. The fact that his subject
   matter is American Indians or non-literate Britons does not, of itself, make his
   work anthropological. Nor does the fact that he uncovers and studies written
   inscriptions make his work non-anthropological. The critical test is what the
   archeologist does with his discoveries, not his subject matter.
        Archeology per se is no more than a method and a set of specialized tech-
   niques for the gathering of cultural information. The archeologist, as archeolo-
   gist, is really nothing but a technician. When he uses his findings to study archi-
   tecture, he must employ the concepts developed in that field, and when he
   studies culture, he must use the theoretical structure erected by those who have
   made it their business to study culture, namely, the anthropologists. Therefore,
   archeology is not to be equated either with ethnography which is the writing of
   cultural contexts, or with ethnology which is the comparative study of cultural
   phenomena. It is on a lower level of procedure and ceases to be merely arche-
  44

 ology when it utilizes the concepts of other disciplines such as ethnology, art,
 mythology, ceramics, architecture.
      There are archeologists whose training and interests lie in the classics, in
 Semitic philology, in Oriental history, in ethnology, and in potentially an in-
 numerable number of subjects. There are also competent archeologists who have
 had no specialized academic training, even no “higher” education at all. And
 these are often among the most capable. While it is probably true that the man
 with the broadest background of specialized training will obtain the better in-
 formation, yet it is often the case that the non-academic “field man” with broad
 practical experience and less formal training will produce the better data. In
 either instance, it is the gathering of the cultural materials that is the touchstone
 by which the archeologist, as archeologist, stands or falls. How he handles the
 information after its collection is impertinent to him as an archeologist, although
 it is very pertinent to him as anthropologist, art historian, philologist, or what-
 ever.
     Here, then, is the answer to the query which titles this chapter: archeology is
 neither history nor anthropology,,As an autonomous discipline, itconsists of a
 method and_a set of specialized techniques for the gathering or “production”       of
__cultural information.
                                  CHa rik           Rs
        AN ANALYSIS        OF AMERICANIST ARCHEOLOGY                  IN THE
                              _UNITED STATES

Haves establishéd a critical standard, it will now be possible to examine
        critically the character of Americanist archeology in the United States. In
a later chapter, this will be done by implication through the advocacy of a par-
ticular and somewhat different approach to archeological problems and materials.
Here, however, the task will be to analyze what the archeologists say they have
been doing and what they have actually done, and then to see how these two
bodies of fact compare. This will be accomplished explicitly, by reference to
the published writings of particular archeologists and in terms of the definitions
arrived at in the preceding chapter.
     It is not to be thought that, in the following pages, the men selected for
analysis are being criticized on a personal basis. Both the analysis and criticism
will be of published results. It is realized that many times the archeologist may
wish to include in his reports certain data or certain treatment of data but is
prevented from doing so because of publication or other restrictions. In such
cases, the vision and intentions of the archeologist may not be criticized, or
perhaps may not even be known. The only fair criterion for judging Americanist
archeology is, therefore, the extent to which the final results of empirical research
measure up, or do not measure up, to the aims stated or implied by the various
researchers themselves. If the results do measure up, it is probably safe to give
the archeologist credit. On the other hand, if they do not measure up, the placing
of blame is an unimportant detail for the present study. It will be sufficient to
have shown that the archeological reports do not come up to the expectations
claimed for them.
    Thus, the men will be examined and criticized as representatives of the tradi-
tions, the aims, and the methods which have been recognized as the best in
Americanist archeology in the United States. The choice of those who are to be
analyzed will in no way be a measure of central tendency. It will be consciously
weighted toward men whose influence in academic and professional circles has
been of the highest. Furthermore, selection will lean toward men whose direct and
most intensive influence is contemporary rather than of an earlier time. But even
within these limits, it will be impossible to include all the influential archeologists
of what might be considered the contemporary period. Some influential men,
J. A. Ford, for example, have not published enough to provide a fair basis for
analysis; others, such as H. B. Collins, Jr., while authorities in their fields, have
been omitted because their influence is restricted. But complete coverage is
hardly necessary for the present study. After the writings of certain men have
                                          45
46


been examined, the critical findings will be found to fit, with but minor accommo-
dations, the work of the majority of Americanists, most of whom employ more
or less patterned variants of a single approach and are concerned with more or
less the same range of data.

    The influence of A. V. Kidder upon archeological research in the Americas has
been, and is now, of the greatest proportions. It is not too much to suggest that
he is the most influential exponent of the discipline active in the Western
Hemisphere today. It was his vigorous and enlightened prosecution of the trend
initiated by himself, Nelson, and Spier,*® which brought Southwestern archeology
out of its Cushing-Fewkes stage and to the lines of investigation which have
been but broadened and intensified in the succeeding years. It was his re-orienta-
tion of the Carnegie Institution’s Maya program that has set those researches
upon their way toward a sound chronology and a knowledge of cultural rela-
tions throughout much of Middle America. It has been his influence upon both
these fields of archeology which has developed the broad foundation of their
research programs and served as a guide for most of the subsequent investiga-
tions in the regions.
    While specifically an archeologist, Kidder has maintained his broader affilia-
tions predominantly with the discipline of cultural anthropology. Although his
Chairmanship of the Division of Historical Research of the Carnegie Institution
might seem to controvert the last statement, it can be demonstrated that over
the years he has been associated overwhelmingly with cultural anthropology,
both academically, professionally, and with respect to learned societies.*?
From this it would seem legitimate to impute anthropological aims, or at least
some variation thereof, to his researches. In his own words, Kidder has pro-
claimed archeology to be “that branch of anthropology which deals with pre-
historic peoples” (Kidder and Thompson, 1938, p. 494) and has called the
archeologist “the mouldier variety of anthropologist” (1940a, p. 527). He has
also identified the aims of the two disciplines:
Together with and closely allied to acceptance of dogma comes failure to grasp the
bearings of our researches upon those broader problems of anthropology whose solution
should be the final aim of all our studies. (1937b, p. viii)

    At the same time, in his writings upon general and theoretical archeological
topics, he has consistently held to the point of view that archeology is “doing”
history:
We must not, of course, lose sight of our ultimate historical goal... . And this we can
most effectively accomplish by grasping the fact that archaeology, because of the nature
of the materials spared to us by the hand of time, must, in the first instance, be a study,
not of history in the commonly accepted sense of that word but of the history of
material culture. There we can be on solid ground. (1942, p. iii)
 TAYLOR                         A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                   47

 Archaeology, rightly conceived, is a historical discipline. Its primary task is to re-
 construct man’s career through the uncounted centuries of his preliterate, undocumented
 past. (1937c, p. 160)

  In designating the group engaged in studies of the pre-Columbian career of the American
  Indians, the term history has been used as symbolic of a desire to do away with the
  somewhat rigid distinction which has generally been drawn between archaeology and
  history. The work of the Section [of Early American History, Division of Historical
  Research, Carnegie Institution] is, of course, archaeological in that it deals with material
  remains rather than with written records. But archaeologists seek to gather from ruined
  buildings and potsherds the same sort of knowledge that historians derive from books
  and manuscripts, and while the subject matter and, therefore, the primary methods of
‘ the two disciplines are naturally unlike, their ultimate aims are identical, for both
  archeology and history strive to recover and to interpret the story of man’s past.
  (1930a, p. 91)§8

      Kidder, however, unlike most other Americanists, has provided a resolution
  for this anthropology-history ambivalence. This way out is neither clearly
  marked nor a point of frequent reference in his writings; in fact, its only explicit
  statement is pretty well hidden from the general archeological public, being
  found in an obscure typewritten progress-report filed in the library of the Pea-
  body Museum of Harvard:
  It should be emphasized, I think, that the sort of [archeological] work the Museum
  is doing on the Mimbres is not merely the accumulation of curious information about
  an extinct tribe, nor solely the collection of handsome exhibits for the Museum’s cases.
  It is much more than these, for it constitutes a definite contribution to one of the most
  important problems of anthropology. . . . Anthropology seeks to reconstruct the history
  of man, of his works, of his bodily structure, and of his mind, in order that there may be
  deduced from a study of that history, the basic laws which have governed in the past,
  and which therefore may be expected to control in the future, the destinies of the
  human race. (1926, pp. 1, 2)

      While there are no other such direct statements, Kidder has implied what is
  virtually the same thing in several other papers.®® In the light of the definitions
  arrived at in the preceding chapter of this study, these views expressed by
  Kidder are some of the most pertinent and significant comments that have
  appeared in the literature of Americanist archeology. Here, both archeology and
  anthropology are said to be doing historiography for the purpose of aiding
  further, more specialized research. But the next question which arises is: How
  do these statements conform to the actual contributions which Kidder has
  made through his field work and through the field work of those under his direc-
  tion?
      The answer is that there is little or no conformity. To date, no cultural syn-
  thesis, no picture of the life of any site or any group of sites, has come from his
48


pen. Nor has he used his empirical data to analyze or discuss specifically and in
detail any cultural process, regularity, “law,” or so-called non-material aspect.
He has “‘done’’ neither historiography nor cultural anthropology.
     His nearest approach to these accomplishments has been his discussion of the
pottery of Pecos in the light of Shepard’s findings (Kidder, 1936b). But even
here the tone is not so much one of analyzing and presenting the nature and the
changes of the ceramic complex of a people, as it is one of investigating the
significance of certain ceramic evidence for the relationship of Pecos as a site to
other particular sites in the vicinity, chronologically and in respect to culture-
influences. The discussion seems primarily comparative rather than an exposition
of the ceramic complex, its position and significance within the total culture of
Pecos pueblo. Not that Kidder is unaware of the latter possibilities, for he asks
some very pointed questions as to the nature of the ceramic complex: for ex-
ample, the question of the relations between pictography, ceramic decoration, and
the ornamentation of ceremonial objects (p. 626). But these problems are merely
stated, and the failure to pursue them is credited to lack of time. If such prob-
lems had been attacked with regard to the nature and interrelations of pottery
within Pecos itself, Kidder would have been “doing” historiography, at least of
the ceramic complex. If he had then proceeded to compare his findings with
similar findings from other sites or areas with the intent of abstracting the regu-
larities between the two sets of (ceramic) data, he would have been “doing”
cultural anthropology. As the matter now stands, he has done neither.
     Other than this, Kidder has not even approached the construction of a
cultural synthesis of Pecos pueblo. He has not brought his raw data together
in any cultural sense, much less painted a cultural picture. We know roughly the
broad outlines of the growth of the pueblo, but for all the superposition and
sequent construction mentioned in his reports (Kidder, 1924, pp. 16-32) there
is no analysis or presentation of the details of that growth or of the cultural ob-
jects found associated with its various phases. For all the descriptive detail in
The Artifacts of Pecos (1932a) and despite the establishment of several periods
of ceramic art (1936b), there is neither any provenience given for the vast
majority of artifacts nor any consistent correlation of these specimens with the
ceramic periods. The description of the artifacts seems to be for its own sake
and for the sake of comparative study on a purely descriptive level with similar
artifacts from other sites. It may well be asked whether the meaning of the arti-
 facts for the culture of Pecos is thought to lie in their form and classification of
 form, or whether it lies in their relations to one another and to the broad cultural
and natural environment of Pecos.”° If it is true, as Kidder says (1932a, p. 12);
 that provenience “would be of interest to a very limited number of persons,”
then this is the most damning criticism of Americanist archeology that has ap-
peared in print to date!
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                49

     The influence of Kidder and Guernsey’s Archaeological Explorations in
Northeastern Arizona (1919) has, I believe, been second to none in the develop-
ment of Southwestern archeology. For this reason and because there is a rather
widely held idea that Basket-Maker II “is certainly well understood” (McGregor,
1941, p. 207), this and his other Marsh Pass report (Guernsey and Kidder, 1921)
must be considered here, although they were written many years ago upon work
done at an even earlier time. An additional reason for consideration is that, other
than these and his Pecos publications, Kidder has nowhere to date published a
detailed site-report.
     The Marsh Pass reports make two vitally important contributions to the
field of Southwestern archeology: they once and for all established the chron-
ological priority of the Basket-Maker over the Cliff-Dweller materials, and they
provided a body of clear and pioneering descriptive data. Beyond this, however,
they do not go. Even taking into account the work of Nusbaum, Prudden, and
Pepper, it is impossible to agree that Basket-Maker II is “‘well-understood.” Ex-
cept for detailed descriptive knowledge of a range of artifact types and some
apparently correct and very sagacious interpretation of use, we know very little
about Basket-Maker II from the papers of Kidder and Guernsey, or from any
source.
    For example, on the one hand we have Guernsey and Kidder’s word that
the Marsh Pass caves were occupied sporadically if at all and were probably used
more for storage and burial than as dwellings (1921, p. 110). On the other
hand, there is considerable evidence, in the reports themselves, of habitation
features such as thick ash beds, floors, layers of grass, smoked roofs, and other
cultural refuse (1921, pp. 30-31; 1919, pp. 27, 31, 75-77, 86). Whatever may be
the actual case, it is impossible to reconcile these apparent contradictions by
appeal to the publications, since excavation procedure and the details of the
deposits have not been reported. At the present time, we do not know, and can-
not know without further excavation, even such an important cultural fact as
whether the Basket-Maker people used the Marsh Pass caves as habitation sites
or not.
    Nor do we know much of the cultural objects beyond descriptions of certain
selected artifacts. We know that the Basket-Makers made twined woven bags,
and we know the weaves of some of the individual bags. But we do not know the
weaves of all bags, nor which weave was the most common, nor the quantity of
twined bags in relation to, say, coiled basketry, other textiles, or other containers.
This is because no account was taken of fragmentary specimens or “rags,” and
there is no quantitative summary of bags, textiles, or containers. Nor is it pos-
sible for the reader to make such an enumeration from the data given in the
reports. No information is given on the proportions within the several descriptive
categories that do show variation; for instance, on the ratio of the several sandal
50


types, or of the different kinds of sandal ties, or of the number of decorated
sandals in relation to the number of decorated baskets. Above all there is little
information on the provenience of the majority of objects, except as to the
cave from which they came. Even this site-provenience, in a great many cases,
must be extracted from the tables explaining the illustrations and cannot be ob-
tained from the text.
    There is no analysis of the association of object with object; contents of cists
are listed, but it is often impossible to identify the finds of a particular cist
with the descriptions of specimens given later in the report. There is no analysis
of cultural categories, such as the textile industry: its materials, its methods,
its products, and its quantitative and aesthetic position within the cultural whole
of the site or area. In other words, there is no summation, no bringing together,
no synthesis, of the wealth of descriptive material. As at Pecos, description seems
to have been an end in itself and has been used almost wholly for the purposes
of comparison with other descriptive material. No picture of the culture has been
constructed from even those data that are at hand.
     It is apparent, therefore, that these reports have attained, but not fully,
the level of data; have attained the level of chronicle with respect to the separa-
tion of Basket-Maker from Cliff-Dweller data; but have attained neither the level
of historiography nor that of cultural anthropology. Once more, however, I
would like to point out that this is not a criticism of the authors of the reports, to
whom allowances can be made for a pioneer effort. It is, rather, to point out
that these reports do not constitute, at the present date, an acceptable basis for
constructing a picture of Basket-Maker culture.
     The archeological work of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, which
has been under Kidder’s direction since 1927, is seen to fall into the same pat-
tern. Although in his capacity as Chairman of the Division of Historical Research
he has many times proclaimed that archeology, especially Maya archeology,
aims at “reconstructing” history, it is a fact that no history, at least in the
sense defined above as historiography, has come from Carnegie’s work in the
Maya field, either under Kidder’s direction or before. This work has been
recently and, in my opinion, justly criticized from the standpoint of theory
 (Kluckhohn, 1940). In the present study, however, the task will be to inquire
into the field work and publications accomplished under Kidder’s direction and
to see how these results compare with Kidder’s stated aims.
     Individual reports of the members of the staff will be dealt with only by way
of example. It is the over-all program and its results, together with his own
publications, that will best and most fairly reflect Kidder’s influence upon
Carnegie’s archeological research. The papers dealing with the Temple of the
Warriors and with Coba will not be included because, although they appeared
during Kidder’s Chairmanship, they had been started and nearly completed
before he came into full charge.
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                     51

    In the following crude, but nevertheless adequate, classification of Carnegie
publications, only those works are included which deal with Maya archeology.”!

DESCRIPTIVE                                 Mayor Works      MInNoR       Works   TOTALS
  Reconnaissance and brief excavation              7               5                12
  Site reports                                     3               0                 3
  Ceramics              ’                          1               i                 8
  Artifacts                                        5              14                19
  Buildings                                        7               0                 7
  Topical synthesis                                1               0                  1

                                                                                    50

EPIGRAPHY, CALENDAR, AND CHRONOLOGY                5              16                21

                                                                                    21


INTERPRETIVE
  Religion                                         1                  2              3
  Cultural inferences                              4                                 4
  Topical synthesis                                0                  1              1

                                                                                     8

                                                                                          79

It is immediately apparent from the table that Carnegie’s publications under
Kidder have been overwhelmingly descriptive. Even within the category of
Epigraphy, there are a great number of papers which are primarily, if not wholly
descriptive. Out of a total of seventy-nine papers, there are only eight which are
specifically designed to interpret, in a cultural sense, the mass of descriptive data
collected by the Institution’s field workers. Seven of these eight papers are by
Thompson; and of these, six deal with religion and associated epigraphy (1934a
and b, 1939b, 1942b and c, 1943) and one deals with tobacco (1946). In other
words, we have Roy’s paper on The Engineering Knowledge of the Maya (1934)
and Thompson’s paper on tobacco, as the only contributions of the Carnegie
Institution toward an interpretation of the non-hierarchal culture of the ancient
Maya, and even here it is probable that engineering, if not tobacco, was char-
acteristic of the hierarchal rather than the common Maya.
    Apart from these few papers, we have descriptions, with now and then a
sentence or paragraph interpreting the use of individual artifacts or buildings
or assigning some class of objects to some cultural category, again mostly
religious or at least calendrical. Pollock’s publication on the round structures
(1936b) is not primarily an interpretive, but rather a descriptive synthesis, and
will be discussed later. We have descriptions of Maya artifacts, of Maya build-
52


ings, of Maya epigraphy together with comparative data designed to determine
their derivation or inspiration and their chronological position relative to
other material from other parts of middle America. But we have no discussions
of the place of all these objects within Maya culture, or even within the culture
of any one site or part of one site. For example, we have many detailed descrip-
tions of hierarchal buildings and many maps of Maya cities. But except for
Ricketson’s work in the plaza of Group E at Uaxactun (1937), we have no
detailed studies of the growth and integration of Maya cities or their constituent
parts. Reports on the sites intensively excavated, such as Chichen Itza and
Uaxactun and Copan, do not give the details of interrelationship between plaza
floors, separate buildings, stelae, or other objects. In the sites visited during
reconnaissance little excavation seems to have been done, the major interest
apparently lying in epigraphy, mapping of the city plan, hierarchal architecture,
and in collection of potsherds by occasional test-trenching. Obviously, it is not
the cultural pictures of the various sites, but their comparative materials, which
have been sought, and if it were not for the writings of Bishop Landa and other
documentary sources our knowledge of pre-Columbian Maya culture would be
meager indeed, despite over thirty years of work.
      For example, what do we know of the houses of the ancient Maya? Of the
hierarchal buildings we have many descriptions, but these have so far produced
little insight into the lives even of the Maya hierarchy and none into the lives of
the presumed majority of Maya population. Many Carnegie archeologists have
becried the lack of excavation in house or domiciliary mounds which Ricketson
has said “occur in every part of the [Yucatan] peninsula which has been in-
vestigated” (1937, p. 15). But their literary tears remind us of those shed by
the Walrus and the Carpenter: most copious but accomplishing little to remedy
the situation. As early as 1934, Kidder said:
For example, we know next to nothing as to what Maya “cities” really were... .
Excavations are needed in the inconspicuous little mounds so abundant at Chichen
Itza, which presumably cover whatever is left of the domestic structure.   (p. 93)
But as the matter stands today, we have a single report on four house mounds
and part of a fifth excavated in 1932 by Wauchope at Uaxactun (Wauchope,
1934). This work occupied seven weeks and constitutes our only Carnegie pub-
lication on ancient Maya dwelling houses, despite the fact that Ricketson found
no less than seventy-eight in 0.3 square miles of habitable land near Uaxactun
(1937, p. 16). Wauchope     makes a very urgent plea for more such work and
gives the names of other archeologists who at earlier times had pointed to the
same need (1934, p. 113). Yet four years later, he still finds it necessary to give
considerable space to the same plea (1938, pp. 146-153). At Benque Viejo,
Thompson chose to excavate in an area thought to contain residential mounds.
But his purpose, as stated (1942a, p. 2), was to obtain sherds which he reasoned
TAYLOR                       A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 53

would be more abundant in such an area. Although he gives some details of “con-
structional activities,” he fails to give an analysis of whether the mounds actually
were residential or not. It is quite obvious from the report that his interest in
the Benque Viejo mounds was in their production of pottery which could be used
for comparative purposes. The mounds as vestiges of former Maya dwellings and
as sources of cultural information of a domestic and plebian sort appear to have
intrigued him little, if at all.
    What do we know of the food habits of the ancient Maya? Gleanings from the
Carnegie Institution Year Book tell us of excavations in refuse deposits con-
ducted by Roberts, Brainerd, and before Kidder’s time by Vaillant at Chichen.7?
But we have no published results of these operations. Trik found 50-60 centi-
meters of black refuse at one place in Temple XXII at Copan (1939, p. 103).
This deposit contained many sherds, animal bones, obsidian flakes. In another
place in this same ruin, an entire floor was covered with a thin layer of ash refuse
with sherds, several bone tools, burned stones. But Trik grants only two short
paragraphs to these finds and fails to list quantify, describe, or identify any of
the contained materials. He says that the ruin was selected for excavation be-
cause it contains “‘one of the finest compositions of architectural sculpture known
in the Maya area” (p. 87). He is apparently not interested in the associated cul-
tural material of a less artistic type. In Ricketson’s report on Group E at
Uaxactun (1937, pp. 204-205), there is mention made of refuse and a list of the
animal species found. But the implications of these finds for the subsistence of
the Maya are not developed. There are no quantitative data given; nor is anything
said as to signs of fracture, cutting, cooking, or general use; nor is the age or
edibility of the individuals or species discussed. What we have in this instance is
mere biological identification and no cultural information. Such data may be of
use to a biologist but are hardly usable by one who would wish to approach cul-
tural problems. Smith and Kidder have said that
... even in the refuse deposits and domiciliary mounds that have been dug, surprisingly
few implements and weapons have come to light. (1943, p. 162)

But what is even more surprising in view of Kidder’s contention that he is
attempting to “reconstruct” Maya culture history is the scarcity of reports upon
even those deposits which have been dug. Since the nature of the information
which has appeared in print about excavated refuse is such as to be virtually
useless for attack on cultural problems, we are left to assume that other aspects
of the research program are more important and more rewarding of publication,
so that as a result they have been published instead of data on food refuse and
other cultural detritus.
    What do we know of the costumes of Maya ceremonial personages? There is
a chapter on Representations of Dress, Ornaments and Accoutrements in
54

Ricketson’s report on Group E at Uaxactun (1937, Chap. V). But the description
is typological, i.e., examples of feathered and other types of headdresses are de-
scribed, as well as examples of robes and sandals, etc. But quantitative data
are given only incidentally, and we are not able to know which type is most
prevalent. Nor are we able to know which type of sandal, for instance, is found
with which type of headdress or what type of accoutrement is found in what
sort of depiction upon what sort of monument. In other words, the descrip-
tions given by Ricketson, being atomized and not synthesized, cannot be used
to “reconstruct” the habiliments of Maya personages or used to make in-
ferences as to the role or cultural significance of the figures that wear them.
The descriptions can be used only for comparing the representations of headdress
and sandals at Uaxactun with similar representations at other sites.
    What do we know of the pottery of the ancient Maya? Here again the
Carnegie archeologists have becried the inadequacy of investigation but have
done little publication to remedy the situation. In 1932, A. L. Smith said that
ceramic studies in the Maya area were handicapped by a paucity of specimens
and the rarity of any specimens whose exact provenience and stratigraphic rela-
tions were known (p. 3). In 1935, Kidder said that ‘our present knowledge of
Maya ceramics is almost exclusively based on fine mortuary vessels” (1935a, p.
119). In 1939, Thompson speaks of the ‘abysmal ignorance of ceramic history
throughout almost the entire area” (1939a, p. 7). And in 1943, Andrews said:
Perhaps one of the greatest barriers in the way of an understanding of the general
perspectives of Maya history has been a really blissful ignorance of the ceramics of the
Yucatan Peninsula. (p. 62)

Thus, from some of the earliest to some of the latest of Carnegie’s publications
under Kidder’s direction, we hear the same cry. And when we remember the
major role which ceramic studies have played in the development of archeology in
other areas of the Americas and abroad, and particularly when we recognize
the growth and value of ceramic knowledge in such regions as the American
Southwest and the Mississippi Valley within the same period from 1927 to the
present, any comparison with Carnegie’s work in the Maya area is prejudicial to
the latter institution’s program.
    It has long since been recognized in areas where pottery has helped in de-
veloping a chronology and a series of cultural relationships, that descriptions
must be detailed and standardized in order to be usable. Yet Carnegie’s descrip-
tions of pottery are meager, superficial, and far from consistent in the aspects
covered or in amount of detail. In fact we find Thompson as late as 1942, writing
for a professional audience and saying:

Maya pottery reveals such diversity of form, and so few descriptions of material other
than the more grandiose mortuary types exist, that the task of combining an adequate
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  2)

enumeration of types with a due regard to cost of publication and the necessity of not
burdening the reader with too many pages of description presents a serious problem.
(1942a, p. 4, italics mine)
To anyone fully aware of the value of ceramic studies and equally aware of the
requirements of comparative study, the real need would seem to call for a fuller
and more regularized description rather than an apologetic effort to produce the
reverse.
     But if the descriptions are inadequate for satisfactory comparative studies, it
still remains that the Carnegie archeologists are primarily interested in this very
comparative study and not in the ceramic complex per se. They apparently are
intent upon using pottery to establish cultural and temporal relations between
sites. They are not intent upon developing and analyzing the pottery complex
at a given site or in deriving, from a study of such pottery, any inferences as to
the nature of the particular cultural expression or of Maya culture as a whole.
There are many examples to support this contention.
     One of Kidder’s first acts on becoming Chairman of the Division was to
inaugurate a combined pottery-architecture study (Kidder, 1939, p. 238). This
was for the express purpose of placing the respective types in proper chron-
ological sequence and of supplementing the epigraphic chronology (Kidder,
1930a, p. 101). A. L. Smith seems to be offering a vindication of Carnegie’s
concern with the fine, mortuary ceramics when he observes that the utility
wares are conservative and show local and temporal variations only in subtle tech-
nological differences, while the fine wares, on the other hand, reflect the
individual maker, vary more, and hence are more reliable criteria for “regional
and chronological” classification (1932, p. 3). At a later date, we have the
statement of Kidder and Shepard:
We have described these specimens in detail because, as has been said, they exhibit
the earliest known examples of the decorative use of stucco; also because preliminary
study of stuccoed vessels from subsequent horizons at Kaminaljuyu and elsewhere in
Mesoamerica indicates that various materials and techniques were employed and that
these may prove to have regional and chronological significance. (1944, pp. 28-29, italics
mine)
In his report on Structure A-1 at Uaxactun, Robert Smith says that the six
complete mounds of the structure constitute the most perfect single medium
yet discovered in the Maya area for the correlation of architecture, ceramics,
and burial customs (1937, p. 226). But in the succeeding pages he fails to go
into this correlation or to give information on the burials found, and he leaves
the pottery to be treated in another, to date unpublished volume (p. 230). His
conclusions are occupied with inferences as to chronology.
    Thompson’s use of pottery is likewise dominated by chronological and com-
parative considerations. His very approach to Benque Viejo was instigated by
56

such concerns and his use of the pottery of San José was wholly “to fit San
José into Maya history by comparisons with ceramic types already placed in
sequence at other sites” (1939a, p. 7). How else can one explain the fact that at
both the sites he worked only with rim and “significant” base sherds or kept only
rim, bottom, and shoulder sherds unless some other fragment revealed ‘‘signifi-
cant” form or decoration (1939a, p. 65; 1942a, p. 4)? Furthermore, other sherds
apparently were not even counted, at least at San José. One may legitimately
ask: what made those certain sherds “significant” and why, in the Maya area, is
shape “of more importance than ware in classifying the common monochrome
forms” (1942a, p. 4)? A glance at the reports themselves will return the answer:
not for an understanding of the ceramic complex of the sites or of Maya ceramics
as a whole, but for comparative studies on a regional and chronological basis
with a view to establishing the relation of one site to another.
    In Carnegie’s publications on excavation or reconnaissance, rarely if ever
are we provided with sherd percentages, the ratio of decorated to undecorated
pottery, the relative amounts of the several pottery types within or around the
several types of buildings, an analysis of the types and quantities of ceramic
objects found with burials of varying categories such as age, sex, location, etc.
As quoted above, Kidder and others have noted the incompleteness of our
knowledge of Maya ceramics other than the mortuary wares. Yet despite this
awareness, there has been no increase of publications covering the domestic
wares, and this in the face of much field work and much publication in the
architectural, religious, artifactual, and epigraphic realms. I am aware, of
course, that Roberts and Brainerd have worked a great deal on ceramics and
that Shepard has been doing ceramic technology; but I am equally aware that
published results have been indicatively few and that other Carnegie archeolo-
gists have neglected ceramics, at least in publication if not in the field. What-
ever the reasons behind this situation may be, the results are clear. Carnegie’s
publication list and the contents of its various papers indicate much less intensity
of stimulation along ceramic lines than along other lines. If Kidder’s direction
had been vigorously oriented toward comprehensive and detailed ceramic studies,
it seems highly probable that more published results would have appeared, and
the ratio of ceramic to, say, architectural or epigraphic studies might have been
more on a par. Our knowledge might now encompass more than merely mortuary
ware, and we might know more about ceramics as a cultural complex. And
all this would be in addition to comparative and chronological information
which would hardly have been impaired by such further data.
     Before taking up the final point in the analysis, I would like to mention
 four papers which go beyond mere description and contribute most substantially
 to our knowledge of Maya culture. I refer to Roys’s The Engineering Knowledge
 of the Maya (1934) and three papers by Thompson, Maya Chronology: the
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                57


Fifteen Tun Glyph (1934a), The Moon Goddess in Middle America (1939b),
and Maya Arithmetic (1942b). In his monograph, Roys says that he is writing
. .. to present facts which will allow us to picture the mental traits and trends which
were responsible for the spectacular results which the student and the traveler now
see in Yucatan and Guatemala. (p. 35)

And Thompson projects an idea along a similar vein when he says that “if we
are ever to achieve a comprehensive reconstruction of Maya culture, we must
have some insight into Maya mental processes” (1942b, p. 41). Earlier he had
said that the bridge between our mentality and that of the Maya should be
strengthened by making our translations of the glyphs follow as closely as
possible those distinctions which were made by the Maya themselves (1934a, p.
253). Other than these few papers, it has remained for non-Carnegie archeolo-
gists to give us even our topical syntheses, for example Butler’s work on dress
and ornament (1931). Although Morris as early as 1931 said that “it would be
of marked    interest to know    what units of measurement       were   employed”    by
the Maya in their architecture (p. 210), it remained for a non-Carnegie student
actually to make a study of this problem (Cramer, 1938; see also, Blom, 1935).
Tschopik analyzed and synthesized the weaves of textiles and textile patterns
painted on Uloa Valley pottery (Ms., 1937), and Cresson attacked the problem
of whether the Maya used sweat houses (1938). Such problems and approaches
to problems have been left strictly alone by Carnegie, except for Thompson’s
brief note on Some Uses of Tobacco among the Maya (1946). Pollock’s mono-
graph on the Round Structures of Middle America (1936b) is descriptive, classi-
ficatory, and distributional. As a topical review, it is descriptive rather than
interpretive or integrative. There is little which helps to fit these structures into
the culture of their respective sites or into Maya culture as a whole. They are
without cultural contexts, except certain Quetzalcoatl and Mexican connections.
    And so it goes. Carnegie has sought and found the hierarchal, the grandiose.
It has neglected the common, the everyday. And even within its chosen segment
of Maya culture, it has produced data for the most part in a narrowly descriptive
range. Kidder himself has several times alluded to this one-sided predilection for
the grandiose and the “fancy” in archeology:
Non-ceramic specimens have proved to be relatively rare at all Middle American sites
so far investigated. This is partly to be accounted for by the fact that excavators
have confined themselves largely, as did we at Guaytan, to work in ruined ceremonial
structures in which, of course, little was left at abandonment and into whose massive
rubble construction went clean, new material, unlikely to contain artifacts of any
sort. (Smith and Kidder, 1943, p. 162)

Thus, archaeologists are often only allowed to excavate when spectacular discoveries
may be expected and are turned aside from their proper business, which is the study
58

of the long, slow growth of human culture and the formulation of those problems of
the development of society whose solution is, in the last analysis, the common aim of both
anthropology and history. (Kidder, 1937c, p. 160)
But this realization seems to have produced little or nothing in the way of
action in the field or results in print. A most illuminating case in point is the
excavation at Kaminaljuyu (Kidder, 1945a).
     At this locality, the original intention had been to conduct stratigraphic
tests in a midden which had already produced a large amount of material and
which is evidently of considerable extent. Gamio had previously worked there in
what appeared to be early deposits, and Lothrop had discovered sculptures
which seemed late. The site presented, therefore, “a likely place for finding
deposits representative of at least two phases of Guatemala Highland culture”
 (p. 65). In the face of the scarcity of stratigraphic excavations in the Maya
area as a whole, this would seem to have been a very worthy project and one
which might give promise of some well-grounded conclusions upon cultural
manifestations, their modifications, and their sequence. But the road to Hell
and the field of Maya archeology are paved with good intentions. The project
was abandoned for an attack on a mound which they “figured could be cleared
in three weeks or so at the cost of about a hundred dollars.”           (p. 66)
    The readiness with which stratigraphic excavation was abandoned for a
mound which promised no more than three weeks’ work is the point that I wish to
emphasize here. Expediency and a need to preserve the mound from destruction
cannot be considered to have been of vital importance in making the choice
between midden and mound. Five meters had been cut off the mound to enlarge
a football field, but the bounce of an Association football would hardly endanger
the structure, and there were some 198 other mounds in the site. Perhaps Dr.
Villacorta was importunate in asking “if the Carnegie Institution would care to
make further investigations” (p. 66). But it is very questionable that the
strongest urging would, of itself, have made Kidder abandon excavations that he
considered more important or induced him to attack a project that did not hold
equal or more promise from his own point of view. This promise could not have
been stratigraphy or impressive finds, because these were not in evidence in the
mound. Nor could it have been the promise of shedding light on Gamio’s or
Lothrop’s finds, because material of such types had not been encountered in the
mound. Nor could it have been a promise of clarifying the culture of the site
as a whole, because the mound was obviously hierarchal on the evidence of a
substructure already exposed. Kidder says that the offer to excavate the mound
was accepted because
. . . the potsherds found [in the mound] were not of Miraflores types. Furthermore,
aside from the “brick-kiln” stairway, no remains of buildings had appeared at any of the
Kaminaljuyu mounds and we were keen to learn something of the site’s architecture.
 (p. 60)"
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  59


That this reason is based purely upon an interest in comparative studies out-
side the site can easily be demonstrated. For even if the dig were successful in
uncovering a quantity of those as-yet-unknown potsherds and a specific example
of Kaminaljuyu architecture, if these discoveries could not be associated with
the trash accumulations and other cultural aspects of the site, what value had
they? The answer is that they had value as data to be compared with other
potsherds and other architecture from other sites for the purpose of showing
regional and chronological relations. Excavations in the hierarchal mound alone
would leave their connection with the life of the ancient inhabitants of
Kaminaljuyu an almost unknown factor.
    And this is exactly what happened. The archeologists found a great deal of
entirely new material, but Kidder says that the epoch represented, the so-called
Esperanza phase, is “the only period in the life of that site with which we are
even reasonably familiar” (p. 74) and that even about this phase, the only
information concerns the ceremonial set-up:
. .. aS to the people who labored under so heavy a weight of service to their rulers and
their rulers’ gods, we know very little. Some day we shall get around to excavating
the village sites and the little unspectacular house mounds. [Cf. what he said in 1934
about Chichen Itza, quoted p. 52 above.] These will give us an insight into the
domestic arrangements of the commoners: their houses, their implements, their methods
of cooking. Their graves may teach us, perhaps, something of humble folk cults. Such
work will also be of the greatest archaeological significance, for the small amount of
digging we did outside of the mounds showed that temple furniture and the mortuary
equipment of the overlords was in a class by itself. It no more represented the general
contemporary culture of Esperanza Kaminaljuyu than the contents of a Park Avenue
drawing room does that of the United States. (p. 75)

The cultural objects from the Esperanza phase are merely ceremonial specimens
usable for comparative purposes. At the site itself, they are descriptions floating
unattached between the Miraflores and the late prehistoric phases. They cannot
be fitted into a cultural picture of Kaminaljuyu because they represent at best
only the hierarchal segments of their own phase, because they have few, and
only the vaguest, ties with the other local cultural phenomena, and because these
other phenomena are themselves virtually unknown. Once more we have heard
about what needs to be done, while observing the results of the very opposite
procedure.
    From the facts cited above, it may be concluded that both the field work and
the publications of the Carnegie are weighted overwhelmingly toward the
hierarchal. They have hardly touched, and then only incidentally, the cultural
remains of the common Maya. But even within the hierarchal culture, the
emphasis has not been to construct a picture of how the Maya hierarchy lived:
what they did and where, when, how, and with what. Such intensive excavations
as have been made have not been directed toward the clarification of these
60


problems, but rather toward the finding of material for comparative and
chronological studies or, many times, just to excavate a structure which appeared
to be of rare or unknown type or was prominent or artistically beautiful.”
Architecture, sculpture, epigraphy, and ceramics to a lesser extent have occupied
the efforts of Kidder and his archeologists, and these categories have been
treated for their comparative value with regard to origins, influences, and
chronology. It is a further fact that, when comparisons have been made, they
have been of physical descriptions of phenomena rather than of the relation-
ships of these phenomena within one site compared with the relationships of
similar phenomena at another site. In other words, comparisons have been based,
not upon similar cultural contexts, but upon similar physical appearance.
Description and not culture has been compared.*®
     On the assumptions that such physical similarities indicate cultural connec-
tions and hence a rough contemporaneity under normal circumstances, com-
parisons of this sort are valuable for the establishment of chronological relation-
ships between sites and areas. But the nature of the cultural connection, whether
trade or stimulus diffusion or migration or whatever, and the significance of the
connection for the cultures themselves, cannot be told from descriptive simi-
larities alone. Inferences as to such factors, if they can be made at all, have to
be made with the added evidence of their contexts at the two sites or areas in
question; and in addition much information, both cultural and natural, about
the intervening area will have to be known. In short, a comparison of artifact
descriptions may indicate chronology and the fact of cultural connections, but
what those connections were and how exact the chronological indications may
be, can be learned, if at all, only from the relationships of the compared artifacts
to their own and to each other’s cultural and natural contexts.
     This point will be treated at some length later in the present study. It is
mentioned here only to emphasize the fact that Carnegie’s work does not
picture or compare the culture of Maya sites nor provide the information for
others to do so. Relationships outside, rather than within, the site seem to be the
results consistently attained and thus, presumably, those that have been sought.
There is little or no attempt to use comparative methods for the purpose of
making inferences as to the significance of the material for the culture of the
individual sites or for the Maya culture as a whole. Some of Thompson’s papers
are exceptions to this generalization, and from time to time others have hazarded
a word or two of comparative interpretation and synthesis. But it is quite
apparent that Kidder has not set his staff especially to work on such problems;
and they have not done so themselves, of their own accord. Supporting this
view is Kidder’s own emphasis on reconnaissance and spot excavation:
During that period [the nineteen thirties] the Division’s archaeological activities have to
a certain extent been reorientated, in that emphasis has shifted from large-scale exca-
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 61


vations at single sites to surveys designated to extend knowledge of the development
and distribution of various elements of Maya culture. . . . In archaeology, for example,
we must still further decentralize, devoting less of our resources to large excavations
and more to small reconnaissance digs which will aid in delimiting the range of Maya
culture and determining its chronological and cultural relations with other Middle
American civilizations. These minor excavations should be supplemented by comparative
studies of certain categories of evidence which earlier work has shown to be of out-
standing significance: pottery, architecture, sculpture, the hieroglyphic record. (1939,
p. 238)76

 Why, we may ask, are these categories of evidence of such outstanding signifi-
 cance? Is it not because they have provided “regional and chronological” com-
parisons with other sites on a hierarchal level? Surely it is not because they are
 especially significant for Maya culture as a whole, including the way of life of
both the common Maya and the hierarchy. It cannot be because these categories
 provide the only or yet the best means of constructing a picture of the life of
any particular site, even of the hierarchy.
     Information on such cultural topics would be better obtained from re-
searches of a different nature. For example, we might have papers on such
topics as: Food and its preparation among the Uaxactun Maya during Tepeu
times; The costumes of Maya religious personages connected with the quetzal
bird; A quantitative study of pottery in domestic and hierarchal structures at
Benque Viejo; The social organization of the Uaxactun Maya as seen from their
domestic architecture; A comparative study of the making and use of pottery
at three Maya sites; The effects of environment and cultural diffusion upon
sandal types as seen from the art of Peten and Yucatan; The relations of Maya
mathematics to Maya architecture, city planning, and graphic art; The ball court
as a functional part of Maya city planning; Evidence on the domestic and civil
religion at San José at two different periods; A comparison of the relative
importance of religious and lay culture in early and late Maya sites. If papers,
or pages, had been written on such problems by Carnegie archeologists, or if
the excavations had been conducted to produce the data on which they could
be written, our knowledge of Maya culture as opposed to Maya chronology
and extra-territorial relationships would probably be much advanced over its
present state. In addition, it is safe to say that our “regional and chronological”
studies would be set upon a much firmer foundation due to the weighting and
balance given by a fuller cultural context.
   In the light of this analysis, it is quite apparent that Kidder, despite his
stated aims, has neither “done” nor provided the data for “doing” anthropology
or historiography, at least in the sense in which these two terms have been
defined in the present study. Certainly there is more to historiography than merely
making physical descriptions of architecture, ceramics, and cities and placing
62


them in chronological order. This is chronicle. What Carnegie has been doing is
really chronicle of a restricted range of Maya culture: the artistic, religious, and
epigraphic remains of the hierarchy.
    It is my opinion that three factors are responsible for the character of
Kidder’s archeological work, both in the Maya area and in the Southwest. It is
possible that these factors are, in turn, due to confusions arising from a failure
to analyze thoroughly and explicitly his own conceptual scheme. But before
proceeding to discuss these particular points, a possibly significant example will
be given by way of introduction.
   In 1940, speaking in general of Middle American studies and specifically of
the Carnegie Institution, Kluckhohn noted the tendency to ignore the concept
theory or to use it in a derogatory sense as a synonym for speculation. He force-
fully and most convincingly pointed to the need for an explicit awareness of
theory and its place in scholarly and intellectual pursuits, not as hypothesis
and speculation but as “the conceptual framework of a single discipline.” The
very next year a new series of publications was inaugurated by Carnegie entitled
Theoretical    Approaches to Problems. In the second issue, Thompson says:
The fact that the paper is published in the present series is sufficient indication that
the case is not considered to have been completely proved. (1944, p. 23)

From this statement and the tone of the papers themselves, it is plain that
Carnegie still subscribes to the view that theoretical means speculative or hypo-
thetical, One may wonder whether Kidder, in starting this new series, was trying
to answer Kluckhohn’s criticisms and was confused, whether he was implicitly
denying Kluckhohn’s definition of theory, whether it was an oversight, or just
what.
    The first of the factors held to be responsible for the character of Kidder’s
work is the need to develop a chronology as the first step in archeological re-
search. To this may be attributed the high development of epigraphic, archi-
tectural, and art studies in his Maya program. These remains of hierarchal
culture are relatively easily observed, of considerable aesthetic and esoteric
interest in themselves, and therefore are represented by a considerable body
of literature from the time of the earliest explorers to that of the present arche-
ologists, and extending over the length of Middle America. They thus provide
a wealth of comparative data which are more voluminous and ready-to-hand
than those derived from the so-called minor antiquities such as ceramics, do-
mestic architecture, and other everyday artifacts. Chronology is chronology, and
one built purely from a small range of hierarchal material is perfectly satis-
factory—provided either of two premises: first, that one is interested only in the
chronology of hierarchal material; or second, that other cultural materials can
be tied into the hierarchal chronology by association. Chronology is admittedly
an important factor in any archeological research, and the earliest and surest
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              63

method of establishing it is to be commended. But after a sequence of periods
has been established, if then the very culture of those periods is unknown, we
may justifiably ask “so what?” If we claim that chronology is a means to the
end of understanding culture and if we erect our chronology but produce no
cultural information, we delude ourselves, for we are no further along in our
study of culture than before. This seems to be what has happened in the case
of Carnegie’s work in the Maya area. A series of time periods have been set up on
the basis of epigraphy, architecture, art, and ceramics; but outside of this
restricted range of subjects, little or nothing is known about the life of the
Maya during those time periods. Food, shelter, clothing, implements, social
groupings, domestic religion, methods of manufacture, motor habits, the nature
of trade, these subjects and many more are to all intents and purposes as un-
known today, after nearly twenty years of research under Kidder’s direction,
as they were when Maudslay and Maler worked the Maya area. Chronology is
vitally important for cultural studies, if culture is also studied.
    Possibly connected with the first is the second factor of Kidder’s work. He
has seemed to favor a wait-until-all-the-evidence-is-in policy with regard to any
broad-scale treatment of Maya history. It may be that controversies in the
chronological research and the failure to build an absolutely sure sequence,
especially in Yucatan, has led him to this position. But whatever the cause, his
words indicate that the policy is in effect. In 1939, he said that a history of the
Maya should be synthesized at the end of the 1940’s to be based on all the
various branches of investigation which the Carnegie Institution has pursued in
that area (p. 239). In 1935, he had said: ‘“‘Many data have to be accumulated
before synthesis can become worthwhile” (1935b, p. 115). To this policy may
be attributed the scarcity of topical syntheses and the failure of the Carnegie
archeologists, with the exception of Thompson (1943), even to essay chronological
syntheses of hierarchal events from the mass of collected data.
    While it is true that many data are needed for any history and that an exten-
sive and detailed history requires much information from many sources, it is also
true that waiting for over twenty years to begin assembling the cultural data
necessary for writing history is a dubious procedure. It would seem better to
have written certain sections of the proposed historiography as the data came
in or as research projects on certain topics were completed. As the situation now
stands and as it has been demonstrated in the preceding pages, Carnegie’s
publications contain little information which can be used to construct a picture
of ancient Maya culture, its character and its development. If Kidder’s history,
which he has proposed to write at the end of the 1940's, is to come from those
publications, it certainly will not be historiography as that term was defined in
the preceding chapter of the present study. Nor is it at all probable that un-
published field notes or uncompleted research projects, aimed, as they quite
64


certainly have been, at chronological and comparative conclusions, will be able
to provide the details which are necessary for abstracting other cultural in-
 formation out of the archeological materials. Even were this possible on the
basis of Carnegie’s unpublished information, such a procedure would demand
a complete and intensive reworking of the data already worked. This would be
a thankless, expensive, repetitive, and thus wasteful task and one which therefore
has small likelihood of receiving attention. It does not seem likely that Kidder
intends completely to re-orient the Carnegie’s approach to archeological ma-
terials, to wash out and wring dry once again the same data in order to abstract
a completely different set of inferences. It is much more likely that when he
finally accomplishes the synthesis and interpretation which he has several times
mentioned (1935b, p. 114; 1933, p. 83), he means to bring together and
interpret, on a foundation of more data, the same “regional and chronological”
aspects of the same range of (hierarchal) materials. He probably does not mean
a cultural interpretation and a synthesis into a cultural picture of Maya culture
as a whole.
     Perhaps the writing of Maya history does not mean to Kidder the descrip-
tion of their cultural life and its concomitant events moving and changing in
time and space. Perhaps when he claims that Carnegie’s program of Maya
research is dealing with the history of the Maya (1932b, 1933), he does not
mean that it is attempting to write history in the sense of historiography as de-
fined in the present study. Perhaps Kidder has a different idea of what consti-
tutes the writing of history. This, I believe, is the crux of the matter.
     It is concerning his conception of the writing of history, the third factor of
his work, that Kidder shows most clearly those contradictions which confuse
and make difficult any analysis of his writings. In some of his publications and in
his own field work together with that of the men under his direction, he seems to
hold the opinion that the writing of history concerns itself with the grandiose,
with the rise and the flowering and the fall of civilizations. This tendency has
already been demonstrated explicitly and by implication in the preceding pages:
a tendency which appears to go beyond the requirements of expediency in estab-
lishing a chronology. One of Kidder’s own statements may be used to lend
support to this analysis:
Likewise, though the career of the Maya has even less bearing upon the problems of
the moment, it gives opportunity for study of the rise and spread of a culture, the
dominance of absolute rulers, political rivalries and civil wars, the decline and eventual
fall of a virile civilization, submission to foreign military conquest, adjustments between
a dense native population and a small class of alien overlords. Such events and such
situations have shaped the course of history at all times and throughout the world.
(1940b, p. 261)
This reads like a prospectus of one of Gibbon’s or von Ranke’s Staatsgeschichte
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 65

historiographies. With the exception of the phrase about adjustments between
a native population and their overlords, there is nothing that might be called
culture-history, and it is a far cry from the tenets of the New History and other
recent historiographic trends. The “pomp and circumstance” of the Maya past
are what seem to impress Kidder here. The rise, flourishing (or spread and
flowering), the fall of the Maya civilization is a theme which runs through a
significant number of Carnegie publications.’7 To attain such Gibbonesque
results, it is obvious that events and not cultural conditions must be given first
place in research. Or at best, what cultural context is provided will be of the
hierarchy and not of the Maya as a whole.
     It is confusing to find that Kidder has several times made statements whick.
can only be interpreted as direct contradictions of this point of view, as when
he says:
Only when we have much fuller knowledge of everyday household utensils, corn-
grinders, common stone and bone tools, objects which were not subject to shifting
whims of fashion or influenced by new and perhaps quickly and widely spreading cults,
shall we be able to discern the basic relations of cultures. (1945a, p. 75)

Only by constant repression of the desire, ingrained in human beings as well as in
magpies, to collect for collecting’s sake, can the archaeologist force himself to eschew
the sensational, to search for in the field, and to study in the laboratory, the common
everyday objects which alone can tell him the true story of cultural development.
(1937a, p. 218)78
To such preaching we can but say amen—and continue to search in Carnegie’s
record for the practice.
    A second aspect of this third factor is that Kidder appears to regard events,
rather than “descriptions of cultural life and its concomitant events” as the
hall-mark of history-writing.
The first step [in a historical discipline] is to make record of the chain of sequent
events marking the career of the people under investigation. The second and more
difficult step is to seek the causes and to explain the inter-relations of those events.
And, finally, attempt must be made to extract, by study of the above two classes of
information, materials for use in formulating those fundamental laws which have
governed in the past and which therefore may reasonably be expected to shape,
in the future, the course of human affairs. (1937a, pp. 218-219)7°

Here the laws are to be derived from a study of events and the explanation of
events. Perhaps what Kidder means by an event is something on the order of a
change in pottery style, the diffusion or development of a religious idea, the
modification of dress design, and so forth. But it is impossible to believe that
this is a true representation of his viewpoint when his own and Carnegie’s
publications are taken into consideration. Events to him seem incontrovertibly
66


to consist of such phenomena as the abandonment of the Peten, the return of
the Itzas to Chichen Itza, the arrival of basal-flange bowls in Yucatan, the
date of the appearance of slab-legged vases at Uaxactun. For example, such
topics as the impact of the arrival of those vases upon the ceramic complex
of Uaxactun and the significance of such an event for the culture of that site
seem not to have been investigated by Kidder or the Carnegie archeologists
at all. Their interests appear to have lain in the time-at-which and the direction-
from-whence. Beyond that, they have not been inclined to go. Such “surveys” as
those of Thompson (1943, 1945), while they contain remarks and even sentences
on the results of such impacts upon the recipient cultures, are primarily and
predominantly taken up with “episodic” events 4 la Kidder and with compara-
tive studies to determine the chronology and derivation of the hierarchal ma-
terials from which these events have been inferred.*°
    When Kidder refers to Carnegie’s “pan-scientific” program, whereby arche-
ology, documentary history, biology, and other disciplines are being employed in
the study of Maya history, it is the light which these studies throw on the events
that he constantly stresses:
As I have said, the Carnegie Institution’s work in the Maya field was originally
epigraphic, then more broadly archaeological. At the conclusion of the first decade
of the investigation we were in possession of a large body of facts, and many concrete
problems had been formulated whose solution could be counted on to throw additional
light on the nature of the Maya culture and upon events in the Maya area. But
other questions had arisen which could not be answered by the purely archaeological
methods we had, until then, been using. Furthermore, early attempts at interpretation
of our archaeological findings in terms of history found us without adequate
information in many fields which the archaeologist has neither the ability nor the
time to till. So there has gradually been organized what might be called a panscientific
attack... . (1937c, pp. 162-163)

It is difficult to escape the conviction that only by coordinated research, involving
the cooperation of all the disciplines devoted to the study of man, and the collateral
support of many biological and physical sciences, can we attain understanding of
any given episode [read “event”] in human history. (1932b, p. 91)8*

If one could believe that Kidder meant “events against their cultural back-
ground” or events in the sense of “every and all cultural change,” one could
gladly accept these statements. But on his record, Kidder cannot be thought
to mean these things. By “event,” he quite apparently means a mutation in the
life of the Maya hierarchy, not the cultural variations, both magnificent and
minute, which occurred throughout the entire Maya culture and which in the
aggregate comprise the stuff of which Maya history was made and of which
Maya history should be written.
   To Kidder, history seems to be a series of episodic events and their dates of
TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                67

relative chronology. When he mentions a historical development he most often
means a chronological development; and he has actually identified a historical
viewpoint in the broadest sense as “a consciousness of the implications of the
time element in the recording and interpretation of phenomena” (1930c, p. 391).
When he mentions a historical problem, he seems to mean a problem of
chronology, or more specifically the chronology of large events.®?
    But once more we are faced with contradictions. For in other places he seems
to hold for a writing of history more in keeping with the definition of his-
toriography as proposed in the present study, for example, in his Te Develop-
ment of Maya Research (1937a, p. 221). But despite Kidder’s occasional bows
to a different and broader conception of history writing, it is impossible to
understand how he expects, given his more usual viewpoint, ever to derive laws
of cultural evolution or
. .. to reach understanding of the all-important whys and wherefores of Maya history
and by so doing contribute toward comprehension of the infinitely complex interaction
of those biological, environmental and social factors which govern the evolution of
man? (1935b, p. 114)8

The attempt upon such goals he envisions for archeology, but it is difficult to see
how he will be furthering these ends while actively engaged in such restricted
researches as those of the Carnegie Institution’s program.
     I believe that enough has been said to bring out the points I have wished to
make concerning Kidder’s archeological work. It is obvious that his results
have led to the clarification of three aspects of the sites and areas which he has
investigated: their more episodic events and their chronological and cultural
relationships relative to other sites and areas. But it is also obvious that his
efforts have not placed these findings within a context of culture, which would
be historiography. They have placed them chronologically and demonstrated by
comparative methods the fact of their cultural derivations; this is chronicle, or
perhaps better, comparative and derivational chronicle.
    Kidder has provided us with some of our finest statements as to the obliga-
tions, aims, and potentialities of archeology. But he has been saying one thing,
while his results have added up to quite another. When Kidder writes theory
he often talks historiography and anthropology. When he directs field work
and publishes reports, he talks comparative chronicle.

    Kidder’s tremendous influence upon the development of archeological re-
search in the United States is nowhere more apparent than in that region known
as the Southwest. Although both Nelson and Spier shared with him the revolu-
tion against the archeological approach characterized by Cushing and Fewkes,
it was Kidder who remained in the field. It was he who became the guide and
champion of the new approach: the search for cultural and chronological rela-
68


tionships over the length and breadth of the Southwest by the use of compara-
tive studies and extensive as well as intensive field work. His An Introduction to
the Study of Southwestern Archaeology (1924) sketched the major outlines of
those relationships, and the work of the archeologists who have followed has
but filled out, and in some spots corrected or sharpened, those outlines which
he drew with such remarkable insight. The aims and objectives, however, have
remained as they were established by Kidder, Nelson, and Spier: to ascertain
the coordinates of time and space for the cultural manifestations in the South-
west.
    In the intervening years, two men have been especially outstanding in the
furtherance of those aims: F. H. H. Roberts, Jr., and E. W. Haury. In the case
of these men, as it will be found to be in the case of those to be discussed later,
definite statements of aims, by which results may be judged, are virtually
absent from their writings. Unlike Kidder, the majority of archeologists have
not been articulate as to what they are doing or intend to do. They seem to
assume that their proper aims are not only well known but also much alike, so
that there is no need to make themselves explicit on these points. One thing is
certain, however: both Roberts and Haury, for one reason or another, consider
anthropology to be their field. Both have taken their higher degrees in depart-
ments of anthropology; Haury is head of a Department of Anthropology, and
Roberts is connected with an organization which may justifiably be considered
anthropological (the Bureau of American Ethnology), and from time to time,
largely by implication, each has indicated that he believes himself to be con-
ducting anthropological research.** In view of this, in analyzing their work, we
may look for anthropological results, or at least we may expect to find cultural
contexts from which anthropological results might be derived.
    We may expect to find these things, but we do not. Both Roberts and Haury
have been responsible for great and valuable increases in our knowledge of what
the people of certain localities and certain times had or did not have in the way
of cultural objects. They have defined and set upon a sound basis the objects
characteristic of the so-called cultures and culture-periods of the Southwest.
But their recordings have been almost entirely in the way of presence and
absence, and they have offered little or nothing to explain the relative im-
portance, the associations, the “depth” as it might be called, of all these objects.
They have neither provided us with a picture of the life of those “culture-
periods” by synthesizing their discrete facts nor given us the data with which
we might construct such a picture ourselves. They have been signally success-
ful in erecting the coordinates of time and space, but they have failed to
superimpose the graphic diagram of life and culture upon the axes thus
delineated.
    For example, in his Canyon Creek paper (1934), Haury has provided really
TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                69

fine descriptive detail and even used synthesizing categories such as Food, Dress,
Cradles and Household Articles. On the other hand, neither provenience, associa-
 tion, nor quantitive information is given except very rarely and incidentally.
 Specimens have been described, but their relationships to the site and to other
 specimens within the cultural whole have not been analyzed and cannot be
 derived from the data published. There is no cultural synthesis of the mass
of descriptive data, and the Conclusions are concerned with chronology, episodic
events, and comparative studies to determine the time and space relations of the
 site with respect to other sites and areas. And these comparative studies are
not of cultural categories such as textiles, food, dress, etc., but of specimens
and specimen types on a descriptive level.
     In his Mogollon report (1936b), quantitative data on specimen types have
been provided, but in this case description is the stepchild. It is very meager and
not oriented toward the range of variation. Classificatory tags on a descriptive
level are offered instead of detailed information designed to indicate the signifi-
cance of the specimen for the cultural picture of the site. No provenience or
association is given. The Discussion is purely chronological and comparative
with an outward rather than an inward view.
     It is difficult to evaluate Haury’s part in the account of the Snaketown exca-
vations (Gladwin et al., 1937). But those sections that carry his by-line will be
analyzed as indicators of the direction which his contributions, if not his
original and personal intention, have taken in this particular case. The whole
tenor of his sections and the implications of his approach to them indicate that
his interest lay in demonstrating the horizon-markers for the various “culture-
periods” represented at the site. These time criteria and their relations with
similar materials from other areas are very important aspects of the Snaketown,
or any, archeological problem. But they are only aspects among others, and it
seems that Haury has dealt with them to the exclusion of the others. This is
most apparent from the fact that quantification, provenience, and association,
except rarely, are given by Period and Phase and not by actual association or
position in the ground. The dangers of this procedure are obvious when we
consider what would happen to these vital associational data if ever the present
classification should be changed or modified. Nothing would remain to which
to tie the finds. Here, the point to be raised is that an interest in the life of the
Hohokam people as they lived in those bygone days would have dictated a
different policy, one which would have assembled and analyzed as a unit all
the evidence which could be associated together, say, in particular houses or
single rubbish pits. Of course, the publication of house data did not fall to
Haury, and pits seem not to have been individually treated at all, but his treat-
ment of Figurines shows the same disregard for any but the horizon-marking
potentials of the material. He says:
70


As in Mexico, where figurines have been used so successfully as indicators of
horizon, so here, they have definitely shown their value in this respect and have
added one more significant element in rounding out our conception of the phases.
(Gladwin et al., 1937, p. 233)

Surely this “conception of the phases” cannot mean a conception of the life
of those phases. For, time and time again, he notes the presence of “head-
dresses”   (p. 234), “articles of clothing and leg and ankle bands”      (p. 235),
“ornaments” and “tattooing” (p. 236), yet nowhere is there an attempt to
describe, interpret, or synthesize these items to derive a picture of the costume
and ornamentation of the ancient Hohokam. We read of several types of
figurines which are rare and not to the usual fashion; it might be of interest to
know the provenience and associations of these specimens so as to attempt some
interpretation or abstract some inference as to their cultural implications within
the site. But they are mentioned and then ignored. Could this be because, as
freaks and non-representative types, they are of little importance as horizon-
markers? Animal figurines are not common and “most” of them were found in
the rubbish (p. 238; Plate CCVIII). If some of the remainder were found in
other, possibly more significant, associations, is it not important from a cultural
standpoint to know in what association they were found? How may we interpret
them, if we are ever going to do so, unless we know what other material they
were found with, in what surroundings, in what possibly significant position,
etc.? If I should dig tomorrow in a Hohokam site and find animal figurines in
two different associations, how am I to make use of the Snaketown data? I can
say that at Snaketown they “probably do not antedate the Santa Cruz Phase”
(p. 238) and that, therefore, my finds indicate such a date for my site. But if my
examples were found in a house entrance and also in child cremations, how may
I make comparative studies with Snaketown to help me interpret the cultural
significance of my figurines? Thorough comparisons might indicate that such
objects began in Santa Cruz times as house offerings and then were transferred
to child-burial offerings. This in turn might corroborate other evidences pointing
to an association of children with houses or with certain animals. This in turn
might lead to comparative data between the Hohokam and those groups that
customarily buried the children in their dwelling rooms and interred the adult
dead in refuse mounds or other locations away from the living quarters (Roberts,
1931, p. 170). More evidence and more inferences along these lines might lead
to a hypothesis that in those ancient times there was an idea that child spirits
were harmless while adult spirits were to be feared.
     Such chains of interpretation and inference, if made explicitly and with an
awareness of their contingent nature, may potentially lead to results which will
be accepted, at least tentatively, by the majority of archeologists and which will
help to fill out our sequent pictures of the life of the past and the cultural
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              71

dynamics thus implied. If such results are accepted as working hypotheses, they
will not only point the way to new problems but also by their very weight, when
a body of them has been assembled, serve to set our comparisons of a temporal
and spatial nature upon much sounder bases. A further discussion and empirical
examples of this point will be taken up in the final chapter of the present study.
     Although in general the information provided by Haury in his Forestdale
 report (1940) is of a much higher order than in his earlier works, he still does
 not present his data in such a way as to enable the reader to conduct his own
research upon the material. One example will suffice. The Bear Ruin contains a
cultural manifestation which is a blend of Mogollon and Anasazi features of a
most interesting and significant sort. This fact was one of the major reasons for
its excavation. An examination of the burial-data table (p. 65) produces the
fact that of forty burials only five were without pottery offerings and that, of
these five, four lacked all offerings and one had a “bone” at its shoulder. Of
the graves with pottery, however, those with, and those without, other grave
goods were about equally divided, there being sixteen with and nineteen without.
This would seem to suggest a correlation between no pottery and no other grave
offering. Turning to the appendix on skeletal remains, we discover (p. 132ff) that
the majority of crania seem to be brachycephalic, but two are dolichocephals of
a Basket-Maker-like type. We further discover that these two atypically long-
headed burials are two of the five which had no pottery and that one of them is
the one which had no pottery and the “bone” offering at the shoulder.
     In view of the intermediate cultural and geographic position of the Bear
Ruin, the suggestions of correlation in the above-cited facts might seem to
warrant further investigation. But we have gone as far as the report will take
us. Was the “bone” really an offering or was it a point which might represent a
wound? In what locations and with what associations were the pottery-less
burials found? The one very Anasazi-like house contained a “great number of
specimens (fifty-eight)”: could one of these have been of the same type as
the “bone” grave offering? We learn that the pottery type Forestdale Plain shows
much Anasazi influence, but we do not know from what parts of the site these
sherds came or whether some, many, or none were found near the long-headed
burials or the Anasazi-like house. These are just a few of the things we do not
know and cannot find out from the report.

   Although F. H. H. Roberts, Jr., has given us what are undoubtedly our best
and most thorough descriptions of the architecture at Southwestern sites, the
over-all impression to be gathered from his work is much the same as from
Haury’s: the seeking for temporal and cultural relationships with other sites on
a descriptive level. Like Kidder and Haury, he has been “doing” comparative
or derivational chronicle, not historiography or anthropology. The houses and
ile:


their individual features have been treated at great length, but there has been
no assembling, no synthesis of those “lesser,” “minor” objects of “material
culture” which have been found in those dwellings. The houses and their features
are descriptive units; the smaller artifacts are also descriptive units; and both
are discussed for the purpose of comparisons with other such phenomena at other
sites, not as the material environment of human activity. The data are not
brought together into an assemblage for the purpose of making inferences as to
the life and customs of the people who lived in those rooms or those house blocks.
And the information is not provided whereby such assemblages, as they were
excavated in the field, can be regrouped. Provenience and association, except
rarely, are given only for those specimens which are illustrated, and even these
locations are noted only within the range of a room or pithouse, with some
burial, or merely from “trench south of house E” (1929b, p. 151) or “E refuse”
 (1931, p. 180).
     For example, although five bone awls are said to come from a single burial
 (1931, p. 152), the only means of identifying that burial is to find the illus-
tration and check its number in the Appendix where the provenience of
illustrated specimens is given. We find that they come from Burial E-5, but I
have been unable to locate any other reference to Burial E-5 in the volume.
What   sort of person   was   buried   in Burial   E-5, where   was   it, what   other
material was with it, what context or significant association went with it? These
data are not provided. The section on Human Burials (p. 168f) is taken up
with generalized, typological, and narrative account of this cultural aspect.
There is neither detailed nor specific reference made to individual burials,
except the single rare finding of a skeleton in a ventilator, and here one short
sentence is given merely stating the fact (p. 169).*° For the rest, the generaliza-
tions are compared with generalizations from other regions, and a cursory
attempt is made to make inferences, or rather to refute possible inferences, as
to the meaning of certain practices. There are also statements as to the dif-
ferences between the pit-house and the pueblo interments for the purpose of
differentiating them chronologically and typologically.**
    At two sites, Kiatuthlanna (1931) and the Village of the Great Kivas (1932),
Roberts was able to demonstrate and delineate exactly several sequent phases
of building activity within pueblo structures. It seems that to anyone interested
in the cultures of those sites, in how the people lived and changed over the
years, this would have presented an unrivalled opportunity to develop room
by room, section by section, artifact by artifact, feature by feature the nature
and changes of the cultural picture. From such data, for one interested in the
problem, it would be possible to make inferences and even to come to some
conclusions as to the nature and workings of culture itself as represented at
those sites. Since Roberts has attempted neither to construct a cultural context
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               73

nor to study culture in the abstract, it is permissible to assume that such
investigations were not his intention.’ What he has done is to provide the time
and space coordinates for his finds as discrete entities. As in his other reports,
he has not put back in place, by writing, those data which his excavations tore
from their setting and his laboratory study teased apart for typological and
comparative analysis. "The vestiges of cultural integration which had endured
in the ground for centuries have generally been ignored. The weighting that
quantification might give has been neglected. The natural environment, in
which the cultures were set and from which they satisfied their needs, has
itself been treated as a separate unit, and relationships that might be inferred
between it and the cultural environment have not been pursued with consistent
and vigorous purpose.
     To perform the tasks and develop the information which I have implied in
the above analysis of Roberts’ reports would involve making many inferences
and proceeding upon the basis of many assumptions. But it has been shown in
the preceding chapter of the present study (pp. 31 and 35) that any picturiza-
tion of past actuality requires more or less inferences and assumptions; direct
and empirical proof is an impossibility when one is dealing with the unique
happenings of the past. These tools of method are the very foundation of a
historical, nonempirical discipline such as archeology. And Roberts has made
them himself, and along lines which, if followed out, would have led him to the
construction of much fuller and more significant cultural contexts for the sites
of his investigations.
    For example, in his Piedra District report (1930), using environmental and
cultural factors connected with an underground structure presumably cere-
monial, he has made some inferences as to winter and summer ceremonies of
the former inhabitants. If all the other data from the site had been combed,
with imagination and persistence, for evidence bearing upon this topic, or if it
had been explicitly stated that such a study had been made with negative
results, he would have been demonstrating his concern with the life of those
ancient people. As it is, his remarks on the ceremonies seem incidental and
rather by-the-way. It is difficult to agree with him when he says:
The writer believes that the data from the Piedra investigations give a clear and
distinct picture of the life of the people of the Pueblo I period in that portion of
the San Juan archeological area. (1930, p. 168)
From time to time, he has in fact made remarks upon the life of the people,
as when he discusses the question of family privacy and suggested “several
sidelights on the character of the builders” of a certain house (1931, p. 35).
From time to time he has quantified his data, rarely if ever a full quantification
(except on individual or rare specimen types), but sometimes a series of per-
centage figures based on total counts (e.g., 1940, pp. 10-11).
74


     It is only in his latest paper on the Southwestern field that he has taken
account of the stratified fill of abandoned pit-houses and pueblo rooms (1939),
and even in this report, as in his others, refuse mounds, although they were
trenched, have not been dealt with stratigraphically or in detail. However, the
use of the stratigraphic data from dwelling-fill is very disappointing. For
example, in calculating his percentages for the different ceramic wares, he has
lumped those from the Developmental with those from the Great Pueblo period
to arrive at the relative amounts of gray utility, black-on-white, smudged,
black-on-red, and fugitive red wares for the site as a whole irrespective of
period or provenience (1940, pp. 10ff). The value of these findings for cultural,
or even comparative, purposes seems doubtful, although he notes correspondence
with like figures from Pueblo Bonito. No other percentages and absolutely no
raw figures are given for ceramics. The stratigraphic sherd counts for dwelling-
fills or refuse-mound trenches are not given, and very little use of these data
seems. to have been made at all. He says:
Some of the more significant features emphasized by the material from the stratigraphic
tests are those pertaining to the Modified Basket Maker wares, progress in the
development of the culinary or gray wares, the sequence in which some of the early
Developmental period black-on-white types made their appearance, and changes in
the burnished-black group. (1940, p. 11)

    There is even less stratigraphic, quantitative data given for other categories
of material objects. He says:
There is little in the way of period or horizon differences in the bonework. Except
for the fact that the short, stubby cannon-bone awl was more numerous in the early
part of the Developmental Pueblo stage than later and the long awls made from
the same bone predominated at the end, the bone tools were the same throughout the
occupation. From first to last the tubes, whistles and gaming dies exhibit the same
forms. The rings presumably were restricted to the Great Pueblo horizon. (1940, pp.
116-117)
Bone awls might have exhibited the same forms from first to last, but there
might also have been a significant difference in their numbers relative to other
bone artifacts or to some other significant control factor. In other words, there
are other ways of looking at the data than the mere presence or absence on the
basis of form or type. But if the reader of the monograph wishes to view the
finds from some angle other than that of Roberts, he is prevented from making
these regroupings by the lack of raw figures, provenience, association, and other
details of the material as it lay in the ground before excavation. As they now
stand, the data can be used only for those ends for which Roberts used them:
comparisons on the basis of form for the purpose of extracting temporal and
spatial relationships.**
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               75

     Archeological practice and publication in the Mississippi Valley and eastern
field reflect the same time-and-space approach, the same development of
comparative chronicle, that characterize the Southwest and Maya areas.
Whether this is due, directly or indirectly, to Kidder’s influence or that of the
Southwest as a whole, is interesting as a subject for thought but irrelevant for
the present discussione What is important to note here is the dominating role
taken by the Midwestern or McKern classification. The need for some ordering
of archeological materials, already felt for a considerable time (McKern, 1937),
was greatly increased by the accelerated program of research carried on under
the auspices of the various Federal relief agencies during the 1930’s and early
1940’s (Setzler, 1942). With a vast body of data being produced by these
excavations, there was urgent call for some method whereby the information
could be ordered quickly and clearly and thus become usable rather than a
mere jumble of extraneous detail. The answer was a so-called culture classifica-
tion which is primarily of a time-and-space nature, which deals with descriptive
types of cultural manifestations for the purpose of comparing them with other
descriptive types from other sites, and which has colored the archeological
program and performance throughout the entire area since its inception. As is
to be expected, however, its impress upon the several archeologists conducting
researches in the eastern field has not been identical. In the following discussions
of W. S. Webb, W. A. Ritchie, and J. B. Griffin, it will become quite apparent
the extent to which the ideas and requirements of this classification have
impinged upon their work.
     As in the case of Roberts and Haury above, these men have written very
few statements as to their aims or disciplinary affiliations. But it may be noted
that the latter two have taken their higher degrees in departments of anthro-
pology and are affiliated with the anthropology sections of their respective
museums; the former is Chairman of a Department of Anthropology and
Archaeology. From this and their common membership in the American Anthro-
pological Association, one may legitimately infer a connection between their work
and the discipline of anthropology.
     The researches and publications of W. S. Webb have been among the most
important and extensive in this eastern area. He has given us some of our
clearest and fullest reports and has developed for his readers cultural pictures
and cultural interpretations more consistently, I believe, than any of his col-
leagues. From his earlier works (e.g., Webb and Funkhouser, 1928, pp. 55-62,
180) to his latest contributions (e.g., Webb and Snow, 1945, pp. 313ff), Webb
has continually demonstrated his interest in how his archeological subjects
actually lived (e.g., Webb and Haag, 1940, pp. 106ff), how and for what
purposes they used the material objects which he has found in the ground
(e.g., Webb and Haag, 1939, pp. 5Off; Webb and Elliott, 1942, pp. 394ff), and
76


how these same objects reflect ancient customs which themselves have left no
material embodiment (e.g., Webb, 1942, pp. 362ff).°° Although his cultural
syntheses are brief, nevertheless it remains that he has made them, and in this
he is practically unique among the recent Americanist archeologists in the
United States.
    But Webb presents a paradox. In the face of this very obvious interest in
cultural contexts, we find that his cultural syntheses fail to take into account
many facets which might have been included on the basis of his excavated data.
For example, his summary in The Adena People (Webb and Snow, 1945,
pp. 310ff) fails to treat in detail of houses and house life, foods other than
vegetal, textiles and clothing, the manufacture and use of pottery, weapons and
implements, and many other categories of cultural phenomena, the evidence
for which had been given in his previous publications on Adena sites. In his
report on the Pickwick Basin sites he has attempted in two places to give a
picture of the life of the people who made the great shell-heaps along the
Tennessee River (Webb and DeJarnette, 1942, pp. 307ff, 317ff). But he has
done so only in generalities. He has failed to make use of all the published data
in constructing these contexts. Instead he has given a list of traits “which seem
to present the outstanding customs, as revealed by excavations” (p. 311). This
is a purely presence-and-absence listing and gives no quantification or associa-
tion of traits within the occupational levels. That this procedure may obscure
some valid and significant cultural groupings is evident from the obvious breaks
which occur in the stratigraphic columns, for example the break in stone and
bone-work at the 5-foot level or Zone A at site Lu°®’ (pp. 180, 190ff). Nor does
this trait list help us to visualize or assay the importance of the not inconsider-
able evidence for a sporadic or even seasonal occupation of some of these
river-side shell-heaps.®° Neither is the list applicable to studies of burial customs:
for one thing, there is no way to identify the sex of burials except rarely and
incidentally, and thus to learn what materials were buried with adults of what
sex. There is some indication that children and infants were accompanied more
often than adults with cultural objects (Webb and Haag, 1939, p. 13; Webb
and DeJarnette, 1942, e.g., sites Lu°®’, pp. 186ff, site Ct°’’, pp. 239ff), but this
investigation has not been pursued, apparently because Webb is more interested
in the typology of adult burial and its stratigraphic and comparative sig-
nificance than in the totality of the burial customs of the shell-mound people.
This is explicitly stated when he says:
It is believed that in the case of infants the type of burial was not significant, hence
they are not considered in the study of depth distribution. (Webb and DeJarnette,
1942, p. 240)
    If a guess may be hazarded as to the reasons behind this evident paradox
in Webb’s work, the suggestion is made that it is due to the particular trend
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                77

 taken in his development as an archeologist and to the influence, upon this
development, of the Midwestern classification. By training a physicist, he seems
originally to have approached archeology as an avocation out of an interest in
local antiquities and the ancient life of the local Indians. This is very evident
 from his book Ancient Life in Kentucky, stated to be written for the layman
 (Webb and Funkhouser, 1928). From such beginnings, Webb has developed
into one of our most accomplished field technicians and a comparison of his
later reports with those of earlier date will indicate the extent of his advance
toward controlled, pertinent, ‘scientific’ excavation and publication. But this
progressive “‘scientification” has not followed his original and obvious interest
in how the Indians lived. He has not refined and elaborated his techniques for
cultural interpretation. He has not extended his range of materials for con-
structing cultural contexts. Nor has he sought, by the use of assumptions which
he so admirably defends (Webb and Snow, 1945, pp. 200ff), to delve ever
deeper into the culture of the people whose remains he has been digging from
the ground. Or perhaps it might better be said that he has not advanced along
these lines to the extent that he has advanced in field technique and—and this
is the important point—along the lines of comparative study and a grasp of the
classificatory picture as it is now envisioned in eastern archeology. Since his
interest in cultural pictures has endured, however curtailed, a paradox has
arisen from his definite and, of late, dominant leanings toward a concern with
taxonomy as exemplified in the Midwestern system. His original interest in
Indian life has been allowed to languish, and he has followed current custom
and developed his work in comparative and classificatory directions.
     It seems hardly coincidental that his first trait list appears in a report
 (Funkhouser and Webb, 1937) which is probably the first to be written and
published, in its entirety, after the Indianapolis Conference which inaugurated
the Midwestern classification and which Webb attended. This innovation was
undoubtedly to be expected since the eastern archeologists turned as a body at
this point to fit their data into the classification, and trait lists are the basis of
the classification. But the point to be raised here is that from this time onward
Webb has bent his major efforts to elaborating trait lists and their comparative
implications and has made a stepchild of his former interest in more detailed
cultural pictures of life as it was led. For example, while in two of his earlier
reports he gave much study to the weaves of textiles as seen from impressions
upon pottery (Webb and Funkhouser, 1929b, pp. 14-17; Webb and Funkhouser,
1931, pp. 375-388), in his post-Midwestern-Classification reports no such de-
tailed examinations have been effected, and he has not anywhere dealt with
these fabric impressions except in connection with pottery typology. In other
words, he has not attempted to get at the textile complex of the people through
analysis of fabric-impressed potsherds. Similarly, in an early publication he
78


analyzed the cordage (Funkhouser and Webb, 1929, pp. 86-87), but in later
works he merely mentions cordage and knots and passes on (Webb, 1938, p. 48;
Webb, 1939, pp. 50, 56). It seems that those objects which are thought to have
no importance for comparative and classificatory studies have been relegated
to passing references and omitted from consideration in final syntheses.
    This preoccupation with trait lists may be responsible for certain         other
aspects of Webb’s publications. There is a tendency to slight description of
artifacts and to give instead a typological tag: a bone awl is a bone awl, a hoe
is a hoe, with often not so much as a word about shape, size, material, details of
use, wear, or such matters (Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 116ff, 224ff). Often
potsherds or vessels found in graves are left unidentified (Webb, 1939, pp. 76-77;
Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 117, 188). There is a tendency to neglect
associations such as inclusions in midden pits (Webb and Haag, 1940, pp. 72,
107) and to fail to give provenience from which associations could be worked
out (Webb and Haag, 1939, pp. 17ff). There is a tendency to omit quantifica-
tions as a regular adjunct to typology and instead to give illustrations of types
or “the best” examples without giving the quantities within the various cate-
gories (Webb, 1938, pp. 110, 130; Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 40, 42). It
should not be understood from these remarks that there is no description,
quantification, association, or provenience given. Actually, there is a great deal
of quantification and somewhat less description, association, and provenience,
and in this respect his University of Kentucky reports surpass those issued as
Bulletins of the Bureau of American Ethnology. But the effort to provide such
data seems largely incidental and not consciously consistent. Lapses are too
frequent for there to have been a rigorous prosecution of these points of detail
in assembling his material for publication. His failure to utilize fully the special
geographical and biological studies included in two of his more recent works
(Webb, 1939, pp. 9ff; Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 337ff) may be another
sign of his unconcern with factors not readily applicable to trait-list comparisons
and classifications.
     From the above, it should be very apparent that Webb has not constructed
cultural contexts as fully as the data to hand must have warranted. It is also
clear that, from his published data, it is impossible for the reader himself to
construct a cultural synthesis, weighing and balancing the quantity and quality
of the various traits and complexes, searching associations for constant features,
noting breakage and wear to arrive at an idea of use, investigating the sources
of raw materials in the hopes of defining trade routes and possible extra-regional
connections, and probing other lines of evidence to extract the cultural sig-
nificance and “depth” of the finds. This is so because the necessary details are
not given.
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                79

    Perhaps Webb considers that he has given a cultural synthesis by compiling
those trait lists. His own words might lead one to this belief:
In order to understand the life of the shell-mound dwellers and to characterize their
culture prior to the use of pottery, a list of traits has been prepared. Table 43 is a
list of traits which seem to present the outstanding customs, as revealed by excava-
tions. . . . (Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, p. 311)

The following list of traits describes the cultural manifestation at this site as
accurately as present knowledge permits. (Funkhouser and Webb, 1937, p. 200)%
If this is the case, as it seems to be, here is one more proof of a fundamental
assumption underlying his field work and publications: namely, that the im-
portant factor about a cultural manifestation in archeology is its presence or
absence within a given site. This assumption is accompanied by a corollary: that
the manifestation’s location, association, quantitative and qualitative relation to
its cultural and natural environment seem to be of secondary importance.
These two assumptions are basic to the current comparative approach, and
Webb is not alone in his acceptance of them. They lie at the bottom of the
so-called McKern or Midwestern system of classification. This point will be
dealt with at some length at a later time in the present study. Here it is only
necessary to state that culture, and thus a cultural context, does not consist
of artifacts or other material manifestations alone. It is impossible to get at the
cultural significance of any artifact merely by classifying it with certain more
or less similar artifacts and noting its presence within an archeological site.
There is, I believe, more to the study of culture than this.
     Before leaving this analysis of Webb’s contributions, I wish to state once
again that I believe he has given us some of our best archeological reports.
Although it is true that he has failed to make the most of his opportunities,
it is possible to abstract more out of his publications than from those of the
majority of his colleagues. There seems to be no doubt that he has been
influenced toward a purely time-and-space, comparative approach by the need
to go along with his fellow archeologists and find a place for his discoveries
within the Midwestern system. Perhaps this need has changed the course of a
development that would have led to more detailed and refined cultural pictures
and thus eventually to more detailed comparative studies. Perhaps if he had
managed to carry on according to his own inclinations, he would not have
become so concerned with presence-and-absence trait lists and comparative
studies. As the matter now stands, Webb’s contributions are considerable and
he presents an enlightening paradox.

    The publications of W. A. Ritchie present in general the same character as
those of Webb. While his pictures of ancient life have not been even as full as
80


Webb’s and whereas he has gone over to the Midwestern classification with an
even greater wholeheartedness, nevertheless his development has been essentially
parallel. He demonstrates an incidental, unformulated, but quite definite interest in
how the Indians lived, especially in his early reports but also appearing in some
of his later papers. However, this incipient inclination has been almost com-
pletely overwhelmed by his enthusiastic embracing of the classificatory system,
and his latest works are occupied exclusively, to all intents and purposes, in the
effort to place his archeological material in some taxonomic pigeon-hole. His
interpretations as to the contextual significance of his data have become fewer
and fewer and more incidental, while the elaboration of trait lists and his cross-
cultural comparisons have proportionately increased.
     His association with Parker’s already-established “culture sequences” in
New York State, based as they were on comparative studies of artifact types
(Parker, 1922), might have made him an easier mark for a system such as the
Midwestern. But his publications up to the Castle Creek report (1934), which is
the one immediately preceding his first mention of the classificatory system,
show an increasing number of inferences and interpretations and a growing
concern with filling out the bare bones of excavation and artifact description.
Although no effort was made to make full and elaborate syntheses of the data
retrieved, a considerable amount of the means by which this can be done is
present in the reports. For example, he gave a detailed interpretation of local
events involving a violent fire at the Alhart site (1930, p. 72); and in the same
report he discussed the method of manufacture of a bark barrel (p. 67) and later
included the use of bark buckets to round out an inferential picture of the Mason
site (p. 75). In his monograph on the Lamoka site (1932), he gives an ecological
setting for the site (p. 83), infers the importance of fishing from the artifact roster
 (p. 104), interprets methods of manufacture (p. 108f), infers a feast from artifacts
associated with masses of mammal bone in the refuse pits (p. 115), gives a
somatological picture of the ancient inhabitants (p. 131), and gives a brief
picture of the life of the people at this particular site (pp. 131-132). In the
Castle Creek report (1934), he has gone into great detail on the structure and
contents of some of the pits encountered (pp. 10-29). Interpretations of pit
groupings are given (p. 10), even seasonal use of some is envisioned (p. 11),
events in one special pit are recounted (p. 29), and throughout the discussion
many data are given which, if assembled and studied in a body, would produce
a very adequate picture of their nature, use, contents, and position within the
cultural whole of that site.
     Of those reports issued after he explicitly recognized the Midwestern system,
only the first two, New Evidence Relating to the Archaic Occupation of New
York (1936a) and the Canandaigua paper (1936b), contain interpretations such
as are found in his earlier works. In the first of these volumes, the artifacts are
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              81


described under what might be termed cultural headings, i.e., vegetal food,
game-getting, fishing, cooking (pp. 4-8). In the latter (1936b), the categories
“hunting as well as fishing paraphernalia” and “domestic industries” are men-
tioned, followed by the listing of a few artifact types (p. 70), but there is no
further discussion of such cultural aspects. His interesting analysis of the mean-
ing of multiple burials showing signs of violent death (pp. 79ff) is the only
other instance of such interpretation in this report. In his monograph on the
Frontenac Island site (1945a), he gives two short paragraphs on the mode of
life reflected in the finds (p. 26), but the major part of the volume consists of
trait lists and cross-cultural comparisons. However, there is one sentence which,
had it been developed, would have added a most interesting and valuable
cultural insight:
When interpreted in terms of existing knowledge of Lamoka and Brewerton burial
customs, the Frontenac data appear to afford a case of cultural inertia, reflecting
the persistence of diverse traits already known from each. (1945a, p. 18)

     However, these occasional bits of cultural context, synthesis, and interpreta-
tion appear to be an incidental rather than a consciously integral part of
Ritchie’s reports. This is nowhere more clearly seen than in the case of his
recording of the quantities, provenience, and association of his artifacts and
other finds. In general, he has divided his accounts into two sections, one
dealing with the excavations and “occupational” features and another dealing
with the artifacts found. In the excavation sections he gives both provenience
and association for the various artifacts but he distinguishes these objects only
by a typological tag such as arrow point, potsherd, bone awl, etc. In the second
section, he describes the artifacts, sometimes individually and sometimes gen-
erally, but he does not give their provenience or association and fails, except
in two reports (1934, 1940b), to cross-reference the specimens. Thus, there is
no way to tell which bone awl was found in which pit or which burial. In the
case of awls this might or might not be of importance, but in the case of pot-
sherds it would surely seem of great importance to know what type of pottery
was found with what other cultural material. But even in those reports (1934
and 1940b) which do cross-reference their descriptions and provenience by
giving the field catalogue numbers (and for this Ritchie is to be loudly praised),
this system is not followed consistently, there being many instances of speci-
mens described or located without an identifying catalogue number (e.g., 1934,
the sherds, sinkers, awl, and celt, p. 23; 1940b, the scraper, p. 12; the
chopper, p. 15).
    The extent to which Ritchie has quantified his data is to his great credit.
But here again the procedure is not consistent. In the Lamoka report (1932)
for example, while many classes of artifacts are given exact quantification, there
are not a few which are designated with such terms as “several,” “a number,”
82


“not infrequently . . . among these” (p. 105). Two facts seem to point to the
probability that from Ritchie’s viewpoint quantification is primarily for the
purpose of cross-cultural comparisons and not for the purpose of assessing the
various complexes at the sites themselves. First, the consistent quantification is
found only in those reports (1936 et seq.) published after Ritchie began to be
influenced by the Midwestern system. If one wished to be generous, this might
be attributed to his developing realization of the importance of such informa-
tion. But when, even in these later reports, he fails to quantify fragmentary
artifacts of uncertain type (1940b, p. 64), we may be permitted the suspicion
that it is really the comparative approach which motivated him: for comparative
purposes within the Midwestern system, typology is required, and typology as it
is practiced requires virtually complete specimens. However, at least for some
aspects of the assessment of cultural complexes within a given site, a point is a
point and a drill a drill whatever the type may be or whatever the condition of
a specimen may be. Therefore, for one really interested in the culture of a site,
fragmentary points and drills may be as important as whole specimens—and as
deserving of quantification. A failure to realize this fact may be an indication of
the comparative, cross-cultural trend of one’s archeological thinking.
     With regard to Ritchie’s magnum opus, The Pre-Iroquoian Occupations of
New York State (1944), Johnson has already said what I should wish to say,
namely that Ritchie has excluded any feeling for his material as the product of
human behavior (Johnson, 1944, p. 535) and that method, by which both
Johnson and I mean the Midwestern system, has been favored over considera-
tions of culture and human life (p. 533). This monograph, just because it is
such a broad and inclusive compilation, is the final step in Ritchie’s march toward
submersion in the taxonomic system.

    Although J. B. Griffin is not a field archeologist and although he has
specifically implied that he considers himself to be a “laboratory student”’ (e.g.,
1939, p. 128), his works will be included in this series of analyses for a number
of reasons. Griffin’s knowledge of eastern ceramics and his taxonomic studies
have given him an influence in eastern archeological circles that is of very
considerable proportions. A look into the bibliographies of publications cover-
ing work in that region will be sufficient demonstration of the extent to which
his influence goes: Griffin’s publications are rarely absent. In the second place,
marking an exception to the common practice, he has given us statements that
generalize upon methods and theoretical topics, and these may be used as
touchstones against which to compare his empirical research. Finally, since his
monograph on The Fort Ancient Aspect (1943) has been acclaimed as “the
most comprehensive treatment of a single major North American archaeological
cultural manifestation” (Ritchie, 1945b, p. 398) and as “the most exhaustive
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               83

study of an archeological ‘culture’ in the history of eastern United States
archeology” (Collier and Quimby, 1945, p. 143), it will be of interest to
examine the volume to see just what sort of information has been provided by
this “most exhaustive and comprehensive” study. It will be interesting to note
the extent to which it exhibits correspondence with Griffin’s own statements of
theory and method and the extent to which it attains the levels of historiography
and anthropology as defined in the present study. In the succeeding pages, there-
fore, particular cognizance should be taken of reference to (1943) which is the
bibliographic designation of The Fort Ancient Aspect.
     Pertinent to these interests, Griffin’s publications show several important
contradictions between statements of theory and method on the one hand and
the results of empirical research on the other. In the first place, on a number
of occasions he has either stated or implied that the ultimate aim of archeological
investigation is to reconstruct the life of the past.®? But it is difficult to credit
him with anything more than lip service to these ideals. Time and time again
he has failed to make use of the data at hand, to synthesize into any sort of
picture the information gathered from a site or area, to abstract from the
material objects their meaning for the life of their former possessors, to interpret
in terms of broad categories such as subsistence and social groupings the
information from archeological materials. He has consistently failed to follow
up leads which might have led him to some significant information concerning
the life of the people and has been content merely to investigate factors of
taxonomic, i.e., comparative, significance. For example, in several sites which
are Classified as within the Fort Ancient Aspect a net-impressed pottery has been
found (1943, pp. 85ff, 141, 177f), but nowhere is this netting analyzed or
described. Surely the netting thus indicated was a factor in the life of those
ancient people just as was pottery—possibly not as important a factor, but the
making of netting and the making of pottery were both characteristics of the
culture of those sites and both are intrinsic to a proper picture of the life of the
people who lived at those locations. And again, it may be satisfactory for com-
parative purposes to say, as he does (1943, p. 168), that ‘‘on hardly a single
sherd from any of the Fort Ancient sites are there the fabric impressions”
which prevail on salt-pan-type vessels in other regions. But for a student who is
interested in the life of those people, the implication contained in this remark,
namely that there were some sherds that did carry fabric impressions, is but a
tantalizing indication that if all the data had been given, the nature of the
Fort Ancient textile industry, at least in part, might be added to our informa-
tion. That Griffin has neglected to go into this matter is hardly to be reconciled
with his profession of interest in reconstructing the life of the past.°*
     Similarly, it may be adequate for comparative purposes, i.e., for the dif-
ferentiation of one site or series of sites from other such units, to note that
84

“little use was made of shell for such implements as hoes or spoons, in marked
contrast to its frequent use as such at Fort Ancient sites” (1943, p. 236). But
this information is hardly significant in any cultural sense, until the environ-
mental aspects are checked. That is to say: if the shell which was used for
hoes and spoons had been equally available to both types of sites, then it might
be proper to infer some culturally significant difference between them. If, how-
ever, within the environment of one type of site the proper shells were not
present or equally available, one could hardly draw the same cultural inferences,
although for the purely comparative purposes of distinguishing the two types of
sites the situation would not be altered in the least.°* In his publications, Griffin
is satisfied to note presence and absence, or sometimes the relative frequency
of such objects without relating these data to environmental factors. Once again,
this is hardly the procedure one would expect of a student bent upon recreating
the life of the past.
     A second contradiction is to be found in the fact that he demands the full
culture-roster, or the “total complex” as he calls it, in order properly to
compare two groups, yet he consistently fails to synthesize and compare full
subdivisions of that roster, full subcomplexes of that total. He says:
In my own opinion such [diagnostic] traits, though interesting and valuable, are
in some ways rather a side issue in archaeological research, for our proper aim is
the recovery of the total complex of the group to be studied, and this total complex
must be compared with other artifact assemblages equally complete in order to
determine the true connection between groups. (1944b, p. 366)%°

If this is true with regard to the “total complex” of a group, why is it not also
true of, say, the total complex of their bone work, their hunting equipment,
their utilization of the environment, their seasonal activities, their patterns of
design, etc.? Griffin gives the impression that such groupings of data would be
too subjective, when he says:
In the discussion of the artifacts from each site, arbitrary divisions based upon the
type of material used in their construction have been made, in order to simplify
treatment and comparison and to eliminate the use of subjective groupings based
upon such terms as “art” and “ceremonial.” (1943, p. 3, italics mine)

When he says “total complex,” he apparently means the total number of those
particular discrete entities which he has seen fit to isolate and describe.
    To group these entities under headings which state or imply their position
within the cultural whole seems to be too subjective a procedure for him. Yet,
to me at least, it appears to be assuming a false position to call an artifact a
fishhook and then refuse to postulate a fishing complex, or to identify an object
as a gorget and then refuse to admit a complex of personal ornamentation, or to
note a “musical rasp” and not associate it with “rattles” in a music complex
(1943, trait list following p. 376). In other words, despite Griffin’s implied
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                85

contention that the entities in his comparisons are non-subjective, he himself
actually begs many questions, and at the same time he does not permit
himself the freedom of following out his implicit hypotheses to see where they
lead. When he labels an illustration (shell) “spoons” (1943, plate XLVIII), but
nowhere gives his reasons for thus identifying the shells, he begs the question
of their identity by the use of a descriptive or classificatory “tag.” When, there-
fore, he refuses, on the grounds of subjectivity, to list some object as “cere-
monial” or to group certain designs, shapes, or decorative elaborations under
a heading of “art,” he is only misleading himself. It is no more subjective to
include the designs found on pottery and gorgets and incised beads under “art”
than it is to identify, with no supporting evidence, a particular shell as a spoon
or some bone object as a hair-spreader or some rock as a whetstone.
     Nor is objectivity being served by a refusal to group objects already identi-
fied as fishhooks, net-sinkers, gorges, and the like, into a fishing complex and
to compare it with the fishing complex at another site. Let us, suppose, for
instance, that at two sites the typological range of fishing gear is identical but
that at one site the harpoon heads greatly outnumber fishhooks, while at the
other harpoons and fishhooks are approximately equal and net-sinkers are
vastly more common; or that at one site the fishing gear is quantitatively much
less than the hunting gear while at the other the reverse is true; or that at one
site fishing gear is found with many burials, while at the other it is never so
found; or that at one site, which lies five miles from the nearest fishable water
there are many harpoons and many large fish bones, while at the other, which
lies on the shore of a large lake containing today many large fish, there are very
few harpoons but a multitude of fishhooks, gorges, and bones of small fish. Are
not these findings valuable for comparative purposes, and are they not valuable
for developing inferences as to the mode of life characteristic of each site? Might
we not demand comparisons of such separable segments of the “‘total complex”
as well as comparison of the total number of discrete, descriptive entities? When
Griffin demands the latter and fails to consider the former, is there not an
inconsistency, even a contradiction, between his theory and practice as well as
a loss to his archeological information?
     Connected with the above is the third contradiction: although Griffin states
that quantification of the data and the giving of relative amounts of various
categories is of great importance, he has failed to follow this precept in his own
publications. In 1935, he said:
Another objection was that the relative amount of materials was of as much significance
as their occurrence at all. I tried to show this difference in the percentage of the
material, which was difficult to obtain and to present. (1937c, p. 54)

Later he said:
One of the most important factors by which cultural connections may be ascertained
86


is the relative abundance of an individual trait, of a group of traits, or of all the
traits. In many instances the text description of the cultural elements at each site
contains a record as to whether a trait is common or rare. It will be noted that
the prevalence of a trait is not indicated on the nonpottery trait lists. To make an
accurate quantitative trait comparison it would be necessary to have data which
were not available. (1943, p. 3)

But he gives the show away when in the next sentence he says:
Moreover, to express trait quantities in the comparative lists would   confuse   rather
than clarify the record for the reader. (1943, p. 3)

Ritchie’s use of quantities in trait lists (e.g., 1940b, 1944, 1945a) has shown
that this practice is not necessarily confusing. But even if this were the case
and if Griffin were thoroughly convinced of the importance of quantitative
evidence, it seems unlikely that he would delete it so completely from his pub-
lished data. Griffin has actually given some relative quantitative information
throughout The Fort Ancient Aspect (1943), by recording “rare,” “abundant,”
etc., for many categories; but no raw figures or percentages have been given.
Now it is true that some of these designations (rare, abundant, scarce) must
have been taken directly, as the only data, from the original sources. But also
it is apparently true that many of these designations were made by Griffin
himself on the bases of original figures which, perhaps, seemed more or less
inconclusive to him and which, therefore, he changed into approximations rather
than to reproduce in cold, rigid numbers what he considered to be incomplete
or doubtful data. Nevertheless, if this is a true representation of the case, it
must be pointed out that Griffin has merely compounded the approximation. He
has imposed approximations of a second order upon approximations of a first
order. If the original sources were inconclusive, they still constitute the basic
data upon which all judgments must be made, and approximations of a second
order merely make the results more inconclusive. That Griffin has offered the
reader only his own judgments rather than the original figures removes the
reader’s control over the data just one step further.
     Two other contradictions will be no more than mentioned here. First, at
certain times, Griffin asserts that the Midwestern taxonomic system is an
objective means of arriving at an idea of cultural relations.®’ Yet at other times,
both by word and deed, he contradicts this viewpoint and gives definite evidence
 that the system is not objective but highly subjective.°® Second, he has main-
 tained that the higher units of the Midwestern system, such as the aspect and
pattern, do not represent a “historical entity” or a cultural actuality, but rather
 are merely classificatory abstractions assembled from a synthesis of focus
 “traits.” For example:
When   foci are combined into the more generalized unit called an aspect a personal
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                87

conception of the important features is introduced and individual elements are
selected and recombined in a pattern which, in a sense, never actually existed.
Abstracting the pottery elements common to the pottery of the four foci of Fort
Ancient does-not reproduce a type that was ever made by any Fort Ancient artisan.
The resultant list of traits does have, however, an individuality which, presumably,
would not be exactly matched by any similar list made up for another cultural
division. (1943, p. 205)

If by the word cultural, used in the last sentence, Griffin meant “pertaining to a
(particular) culture,” he is both misleading himself and contradicting himself.
If the pattern “never actually existed” it can hardly have belonged to “a culture.”
Cultural, therefore, can only mean that the division was made up of descriptive
units which themselves pertain to culture as a whole, not to one particular
culture. This difference, which is so neglected or unrecognized by many archeo-
ologists, will be discussed below when it comes time to go into the matter of
the concept culture.®® Yet in many places in his writings, we find that he has
used interchangeably the terms aspect and culture (meaning a discrete cultural
entity)*°° and that he has identified in at least one instance an aspect with a
linguistic unit.*° However, since both these contradictions deal with the Mid-
western taxonomic system, they will be passed over here to await further
treatment later when the problems of archeological classification and typology
are discussed (see Chapter 5). It is sufficient to note that these ambivalences
are quite typical of those who employ the classificatory systems, and this seems
to point to some basic confusion between descriptive and cultural categories.
This in turn may be the result of a failure to come to some conclusion as to a
definition of culture and to decide what has significance for the study of culture
and for the construction of a particular cultural context.
     With the above, and additional, data it will now be possible to hazard
some judgments as to Griffin’s theoretical beliefs on archeological topics. In the
first place, it seems evident that he believes presence-and-absence trait lists
satisfactorily represent, and may be used to define, human cultures. Trait lists
are the only assemblages or syntheses which he derives from his discrete
archeological data. When, therefore, he refers to these lists, these “total com-
plexes” from his various sites, as “cultures,” the implication is obvious. For
example, his work entitled An Analysis of the Fort Ancient Culture (1935)
consists of an analysis of his Fort Ancient trait lists. Later he says:
This analysis [of Baum Focus trait lists] represents what might be called the more
objective statement of the characteristics of the cultural content of the Baum Focus
and of its interrelationships with other groups. (1943, p. 69, italics mine)

One of the primary obligations of an archaeologist in preparing a report is to furnish
an accurate inventory of the cultural content of the units he is describing. . . . In
88


this paper it has been done by analyzing the material      available into traits.   (1943,
p. 335)

If records of a reasonable number of communities having a high degree of correlation
are obtained, a complete trait list will represent, to some extent at least, the material
remains of a human group or groups who were united by identical or nearly identical
cultural habits. In a comparison of this order one is dealing with concrete data that
have the most intimate connection with ethnography and that come closest to a part
of the culture of a pre-existing human group. (1943, pp. 335-336)19?

    In the second place, Griffin seems to believe that the importance of the
cultural data lies ‘in their value for comparative purposes. This is taken to be
the case since nowhere has he attempted to construct a cultural context, to
paint a picture of the life as it was lived at any site. In one report, he (among
others) says that no comparative study was done but that an effort was made
to place the data on record in such a fashion that they could be used for
future comparative studies (Griffin and others, 1941, p. 47). Nothing was
said about leaving the material in shape for other purposes. In another paper,
he says:
There is no record of the [particular] mound from which the various specimens
came, but, since the entire group is undoubtedly of Hopewellian character, this lack
of information is not of great importance. (1941, p. 184)

It is true that this lack is not of importance for certain purposes. But the pur-
poses for which this lack is unimportant are obviously comparative on a purely
presence-and-absence basis. The lack of provenience is most certainly an im-
portant, and a very important, omission if one is interested in looking at the
culture in a more-than-two-dimensional perspective.
In the focus summaries the specific groups were linked with each other and with
surrounding cultures and areas. This was done primarily on the basis of traits which
were not characteristic of the unit as a whole, but which, nevertheless, belong to
various facets of the Fort Ancient Aspect and are, therefore, of considerable im-
portance in interpreting this cultural group. (1943, p. 195)

In this quotation, there can be only one construction put upon the claim that
these traits are important “in interpreting the cultural group.” It is not the
group’s cultural life that is to be interpreted. It is the group’s “cultural and
chronological position” (1943, subtitle) that is to be understood, not the details
of its culture-structure but the details of its comparative relationships with
surrounding groups. The delineation of the time-and-space coordinates and not
the development of a more-than-two-dimensional, more-than-time-space, picture
was the factor which gave these traits their importance for Griffin.
    This leads us to the third belief which seems to be a part of Griffin’s theo-
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                89


retical premises. It appears that to him culture history signifies this very “cul-
tural and chronological position” relative to other sites or areas, with the
added feature of a temporal continuity. For example, after going most exten-
sively into the possible relationships, both cultural and chronological, of the
Fort Ancient Aspect, he says:
An attempt has been made in this study to gather all the available evidence bearing
upon the cultural history and position of the Fort Ancient cultural division in the
archaeology of the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. (1943, p. 208)1°

Griffin is not thinking of a culture history consisting of events against their
background of local human culture and local natural environment. He is think-
ing of a purely time-space, two-dimensional chronicle. He is not concerned with
the acquiring and development of cultural complexes among the individual
peoples of the Ohio and Mississippi valleys, and not with the implications of
such cultural dynamics for an understanding of culture itself as an abstraction.
    There are three things that interest Griffin in his archeological work: the
cultural and chronological positions of sites and groups of sites relative to
other sites; and the connections of the archeological manifestations with docu-
mented, i.e., “historic” tribes. These goals are plainly indicated by the nature
of his work, and he has several times stated them explicitly in print.°* I am
aware of only one place where there is a hint that he might have other ideas
with regard to his archeological material:
It [Ritchie’s Pre-Jroquoian Occupations of New York State] can be viewed as almost
a “necessary” step in providing the skeletal outline upon which future interpretations
will lean for the data to substantiate theories regarding local cultural evolution and
for “ethnological” reconstructions of the life of the people. (1945b, p. 407, italics
mine)

As was mentioned in the case of the Maya archeology of the Carnegie Institu-
tion, information for archeological “reconstructions” of an “ethnological” nature
is not to be found in most publications written with a purely taxonomic, com-
parative approach. The “ethnological” goal must be visualized at the inception
of archeological work, not at the end.
     From the above discussion of Griffin’s work, it is quite apparent that he
is not concerned with culture, its nature and dynamics. Nor is he concerned
with the construction of cultural contexts for the purpose of picturing the mode
of life of bygone peoples. Ritchie has already pointed out (1945b, p. 399) that
Griffin’s “running description” of the non-pottery data from the Fort Ancient
Aspect leaves much to be desired as to completeness and detail. To this may
be added the notation that Griffin has entirely neglected to summarize Fort
Ancient physical type, house type, cache pits, burials, implements, etc., etc.
His summaries of the various foci are occupied with comparative studies of
90


individual artifact types for the purpose of discovering “cultural and chronologi-
cal” relationships between the various taxonomic units. Furthermore, Griffin
has seemed to overlook the fact that the more detailed and successful the
cultural picture of a site, the more sound and the better grounded will be the
cultural comparisons drawn therefrom. Like other American archeologists, he
proceeds on the basis of comparing descriptive types, claiming to be objective
because there is a certain mathematical element in his comparisons, and failing
to abstract, or at least to provide, many of the culturally significant factors
from his data. Griffin is using his great and valuable knowledge for building a
two-dimensional structure, for “doing” comparative chronicle. He is not attempt-
ing to construct a more-than-two-dimensional picture, to “do” either historiog-
raphy or anthropology as defined in the present study.

     Before closing this analytical and critical discussion, it might serve to
clarify the points I wish to make if I were to name some of the publications
which, in my opinion, follow lines other than the purely comparative or taxono-
mic and which seem to indicate some feeling on the part of their respective
authors for the broader potentialities and cultural character of the archeological
data. In thus identifying these publications, it is beside the present point to
argue whether or not the factual details or the derived inferences presented
therein can be accepted as established by the evidence adduced. Here it will
be sufficient to state that, whether evidence and conclusions are valid or not,
the authors seem to have felt, or envisioned consciously, the fact that the
potentials of archeological data go beyond mere time-space correlates. It will
be enough to show that they have attempted to make their facts tell a broader,
deeper story than usually is derived from excavated material by Americanists.
It will be enough to show that they have tried to study the nature and workings
of culture as an abstraction or have tried to substantiate particular facts which
would be of help in constructing fuller cultural contexts. When archeologists,
reporting in detail upon site excavation, include as a regular part of their
monographs discussions and analyses such as are contained in the following
cited publications, then Americanist archeology will be on its way toward
fulfilling its implied obligations of writing American Indian history and making
a study of human culture.                                                      ;
     W. R. Wedel’s paper on the Environment and Native Subsistence Economies
in the Central Great Plains (1941b) provides an analysis of the culture-
environment relationship which is an imperative requirement for every archeo-
logical report or every report which deals with a region for the first time.
Wedel had the vision to see that there might have been other factors than
historical accident which had reacted with local cultural manifestations to
produce the stratigraphic and areal picture uncovered by archeological excava-
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               91

tion. Until these environmental factors could be assessed, it would have been
futile to make specific statements as to the role played by interacting cultures
within the area. Without some knowledge of the environmental aspects, it would
be foolhardy to evaluate the relative importance of cultural and environmental
influences in the ebb and flow of life in the Central Plains—or anywhere for
that matter. When tHis paper of Wedel’s is taken in conjunction with certain
passages (e.g., 1941a, pp. 153-156; 1943, pp. 185-191) in others of his publica-
tions, there is evidence of a feeling for the picture of life as it was led and for
the development of a fuller cultural context. Despite the fact-that he is keenly
and, it must be said, predominantly aware of the taxonomic aspects, Wedel
seems to sense the fact that taxonomy is not the only product that may be
forthcoming from the manipulation of archeological materials.
     Several papers by J. W. Bennett make it very evident that he also is con-
cerned with going beyond mere taxonomy and chronology. Although most of
his publications follow the taxonomic line, he has shown another and most
significant side to his archeological interests. In fact, his article Recent Develop-
ments in the Functional Interpretation of Archaeological Data (1943b) says, if
in slightly different words, many of the things that have been, and will be,
said in the present study. In that publication he cites other archeologists who
have viewed their data from what he calls a “functional” point of view, naming,
among others, P. S. Martin (1938, pp. 295ff; 1939, pp. 467ff), P. Holder and
A. J. Waring, Jr. (1945), and J. Adams. These particular citations most assuredly
indicate a trend among certain archeologists to include in their interpretations
more than the usual Americanist range. And Bennett himself has given us two
of our most ambitious and provocative papers: his study of the interaction of
culture and environment among Indian and White settlers in southern Illinois
(1944a) and his discussion of Middle American Influences on Cultures of the
Southeastern United States (1944b) in which he notes the “organizational-
structural” accretions. In my opinion, Bennett’s three papers cited here comprise
the most significant group of contributions, by a single author, from the standpoint
of promise for archeological historiography and cultural anthropology, that have
appeared to date. Once again, however, I wish to say that I am not prepared to
argue the facts of these papers, merely that they represent an idea and an ap-
proach which I believe to be very much to the present point.
   In the field of Middle American studies, G. C. Vaillant has written an account
of the so-called Middle Cultures of the Valley of Mexico which is historiographic
in the sense defined in the present study. It is to be found in his Aztecs of Mexico
(1941, pp. 28-47) and provides a very fine and much-needed cultural background
for the later developments of civilizations in that area. His accounts of the
Toltec and Chichimec occupations contain less interpretation and picturization,
are more purely descriptive of objects, and are more concerned with episodic
 92


 events such as the succession of rulers and peoples. The sources for his detailed,
 cultural, and most excellent picture of Aztec culture are mostly documentary
 and therefore remove that section of the volume from consideration here. It is
 this last circumstance which also prevents crediting archeology with the accounts
 of Maya culture which Thompson and Gann have written (Gann and Thompson,
 1931; Thompson, 1927). In a short paper in the Gazette des Beaux-Arts,
 G. Kubler (1943) has made some very interesting and suggestive inferences,
 based on sculpture, as to certain mental characteristics of the Aztecs. His remarks
 are definitely in a category which transcends the purely comparative and
 chronological and might, if corroborated by further testing of his hypothesis,
 lead to a better understanding of aspects of Aztec culture or of Aztec culture
 as a whole. In the Maya field, several papers on astronomy, mathematics, and
 measurement have already been cited as going beyond the usual time-space
 limits of Americanist archeology (Cramer, 1938; Roys, 1934; Thompson, 1934,
  1939a, 1942a).
        Tucked away in the midst of an archeological bibliography that otherwise
 ' consists entirely of descriptive and comparative studies lies W. C. Bennett’s
   short article entitled Interpretations of Andean Archeology (1945). Here he
‘ has pointed to cultural situations which, if their implications are developed and
   their details elaborated by further work with a view to testing and broadening
   the inferences, will instigate in that area some of the most valuable investiga-
   tions upon archeological historiography and cultural anthropology that will have
   been conducted in the Americanist field. In what can only be called a complete
   reversal of form, Bennett has demonstrated that he too, when given the oppor-
   tunity and when expressing himself before an audience other than the usual
   professional archeological one, is thinking along the lines of fuller cultural
   pictures and the meaning of his data for problems of culture dynamics. This
   paper of only four and one-half pages is a remarkably stimulating document—
   if one is interested in more than the chronology and classification of cultural
   manifestations.
        For all the years that archeologists from the United States have been
   engaged in Peruvian archeology, it remained for one who is not an archeologist
   to attempt to derive more than the obvious technical and comparative informa-
    tion from the vast and varied textile industry preserved in the arid coastal region.
   In her monograph on Paracas Embroideries (1941), Stafford says:
  To show some of the thought-processes underlying the repeating patterns of Paracas
  embroideries is the major purpose of this study. (p. 13)

  She then proceeds to write one of the most pertinent, important, and interesting
  accounts of an archeological cultural feature that has been published. If we had
  many such intensive studies and if at least some analysis of this type were done
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                93

during the writing of all archeological site-reports, we would have a body of data
which would indeed be cultural. It will not be until other researches have been done
in similar channels that we shall really have knowledge of the peoples and the cul-
tures which we are so diligently arranging in chronological order and setting within
a web of cultural interrelationships.
    Before closing this section, mention should be made of some other arche-
ologists who have in one way or another treated their material from a more
cultural and less purely taxonomic viewpoint than is the usual case. As long ago
as 1899, Harlan I. Smith wrote a paper suggesting the advantages of The
Ethnological Arrangement of Archaeological Material, describing how he had
made museum displays of the material from a site in Kentucky in order to show
the tribal life and ethnology “of those ancient villagers” (p. 1). His words have
taken a long time to reach his public, but of recent years several eastern arche-
ologists have heeded his words and employed cultural categories and/or com-
plexes in the presentation of their data. I refer to Cole and Deuel (1937), Fair-
banks (1941, 1942), and Setzler and Jennings (1941). Problems of a cultural
nature are also to be found discussed in Colton’s Reconstruction of Anasazi
History (1943b) and in the pages on painted pottery designs in Archaeological
Studies in Northeast Arizona (Beals, Brainerd, and Smith, 1945). Finally, Os-
good has drawn a cultural picture of the life around Lake Valencia, Venezuela,
by the use of archeological evidence excavated from the ground (1943).

     We may now return to the dichotomy which at the beginning of the second
chapter was noted to occur within the conceptual structure of Americanist
archeology in the United States. That the discipline as a whole should claim
affiliations with cultural anthropology while maintaining that its objective is the
reconstruction of history is a confusion which, unanalyzed and unresolved as it
is, points to a significant disinterest in the fundamental structure of the discipline
itself. It is quite apparent that the archeologists have accepted the admonition to
do and die without the incumbrance of reasoning why!
    The origin of this confusion may be attributed in part, if not entirely, to an
uncritical appropriation of theoretical principles which impinged upon the dis-
cipline during its development. Contrary to the origin of cultural anthropology
which evolved from an intensification along a single line of interest, namely cul-
ture, the present status of archeology (and this is as true of European as of
Americanist) is the result of a break in tradition. In the first chapter of the
present study it was shown that archeology, as it developed both abroad and in
the United States, had for its major interest the past, the “history,” of the
people whose cultural remains were being investigated. “Historical reconstruc-
tion,” then, became its purpose.
   However, when the growing discipline of cultural anthropology began to take
94


over the study of “primitives” and non-literate peoples, that part of archeology
which dealt with such subjects was duly and promptly absorbed. The important
factor is, however, that although incorporated within anthropology, archeology
retained its major interest in “historical reconstruction” and made no effort to
reconcile this purpose with the aims and objectives of the larger discipline of
which it claimed to be a part. It seems that Americanist archeologists thought
that, just because they were working on the culture of American Indians, i-e.,
“primitives,” they were ipso facto anthropologists. They have not bothered to
analyze their own activities or to inquire into exactly what, if anything, “histori-
cal reconstruction” has to do with anthropology./Furthermore, and for reasons
which are not at allclear, they have come to look upon “historical reconstruction”
as meré chronicle, ‘the ordering of cultural materials in temporal sequence together
with an attempt fo demonstrate their derivations and cross-cultural relationships
They have failed to see, as Kroeber has stated it so well, that:
All history—whatever the field—which is worth its salt does deal with relations,
with functions, with meanings. It certainly is not a tracing of the wanderings of
detached and unrelated items through time and space, nor a precise but arid roster
of names, dates, and places. (1946, p. 2)

They have categorized events and items, tagged them, but not investigated them
in their contexts or in their dynamic aspects. As a result of these conditions,
Americanist archeology is not in a healthy state. Its metabolism has gone awry.
It is wasting and not assimilating its foodstuffs.
                                       jeeRA Bed

                                 INTRODUCTION
  D ESPITE the claims of Americanist archeologists that their discipline
         belongs within the range of anthropological studies and that they them-
  selves are anthropologists, and despite the espousal of “historical reconstruction”
  as their major objective, it is the blunt fact that archeology, as it is currently
  practiced by the majority of Americanists, is neither historiography nor anthro-
  pology. These levels of procedure have not been reached.
      Of recent years, fellow students have more or less openly subscribed to the
   popular conception of the archeologist as a lover-of-the-great-out-of-doors or a
   dirt-scratching mental codger who interests himself prodigiously in the paste of
   Patameragouche pottery but not at all in Man as a biologically and socially
   functioning organism. They have accused the archeologist of tatting endless taxo-
   nomic rosettes out of the same old ball of “material culture” and maintained
   that his findings are next to useless for the purposes of history and culture study.
   It seems that the archeologists are becoming, as Tolstoy once said of modern
  historians, like deaf men answering questions which no one has asked them.
        In their broader implications, these accusations are all too true. Today more
   than ever archeologists have become engrossed, to the virtual exclusion of all
   else, in the building of chronological sequences and so-called culture classifica-
  tions with purely taxonomic inherencies. Their outlook has turned, in full face,
   toward temporal and spatial comparisons with the explicit or implicit purpose of
   writing cultural chronicles. The apparent be-all and end-all of archeological
  excavation appears to be the placing of the resultant finds in one or another of
   the taxonomic pigeonholes, and a glance at the Conclusions of most monographs
  will show them to be chiefly concerned with comparative studies and seldom with
  the cultural integration or implications of the data themselves.
        This approach to archeological research has been called the comparative or
  taxonomic approach. It is primarily an attempt to determine the significance of
  specific cultural items with regard to relationships outside the cultural unit being
  investigated. Instead of seeking to construct as full a cultural picture as possible
  for the particular manifestation, this approach applies itself mainly, if not
  wholly, to those phenomena which have comparative significance outside of the
  site or component. It neglects much of the local cultural “corpus.” It is narrow
  and therefore wasteful of the potentialities of the archeological data.
                                                                                             i7
       The conjunctive approach, on the other hand, has as its primary goal the eluci-
_ dation of cultural conjunctives,   the associations and relationships, the “affinities,”
 _within the manifestation under investigation. It aims at drawing the completest
                                             95
 96


 possible picture of past human life in terms of its human and geographic enyiron-
 ment. It is chiefly interested in the relation of item to item, trait to trait, complex
‘to complex (to use Linton’s concepts) within the culture-unit represented and only
 subsequently in the taxonomic relation of these phenomena to similar ones out-
 side of it.
     It is an integral part of this major aim to make every effort to interpret the
 concrete, empirical findings of archeology in terms of culture itself, of cultural
 behavior, and of the non-material results of cultural behavior whereby the
 materialistic and “lifeless” data may be given life and depth. Such objectives
  should help not only to bring about the construction of fuller cultural contexts
  but also to provide material for the study of culture itself, ie., for anthropology
  on a fifth level of procedure. It is one of the premises of the conjunctive approach
  that, when the archeological data have been gathered in satisfactory fashion and
  subjected to an intensive analysis, they may be expected to provide adequate bases
  for deriving information on the so-called non-material aspects of culture and
  cultural behavior.
       While it is perfectly true that all the evidence for a complete cultural context
  cannot be obtained by archeologists from archeological sites, it is equally true
  that all the evidence cannot be obtained by historians or ethnographers from
  their sources either. Since, as Pirenne has pointed out, only the events and not
_ their inferred relationships are empirically demonstrable in any study dealing with _
  man’s past, the difference between the archeological, documentary, and ethno-
  graphic records is merely one of degree, not of kind, and the archeologists should
  not consider that the limitations of their finds impose interpretive strictures upon
  them any more than upon other students dealing with past actuality. Up to the
  limits of their evidence, theirs are the same privileges and the same obligations
  that impinge upon ethnologists and historians.
       Furthermore, it is probable that much more of the archeological evidence than
  has been obtained in the past can be obtained in the future merely by approach-
  ing the material with a different attitude. This attitude, the conjunctive approach,
  considers a site to be a discrete entity with career and cultural expression(s) of
   its own. It is no longer just one more unit in a spatial and temporal range of
   comparable units. With a vigorous effort to reveal and interpret the minute asso-
   ciations and relationships within the site, much more information of a cultural,
   as well as of a purely comparative nature may be expected. When such studies
   have been made for many localities and upon many time-planes, archeology will
   have a body of data from which the social sciences may draw with profit. It is
   hoped that archeology may thus progress beyond mere description and chronicle
   to attain, within the limits of its empirical data, the level of historiography.
                                  CHAPTER           4
              A CONCEPT OF CULTURE               FOR ARCHEOLOGY
       LTHOUGH much was said in the pages of Part I about “cultural contexts”
         and although the terms culture and cultural were freely used, these con-
  cepts were not defined. But some agreement as to a concept of culture is ab-
  solutely vital to a conceptual scheme for any discipline, such as archeology,
  which identifies its subject matter as cultural. Thus it is a necessary and integral
_ first step in the conjunctive approach to) establish a concept of culture. In the
  present study, the definition of this concept will be specifically oriented toward
  archeological materials and serviceability to archeologists. Although I believe
  that the concept will be found useful for other disciplines dealing with cultural
  studies, it is not to the present point to argue this belief. If the concept proves
  of value for archeology, that will be justification enough, and the course of the
  conjunctive approach can be charted forward from there.
       There have been many definitions of the concept culture. Some of them have
  been complex and a few have been overly simple. My only excuse for offering
 another, somewhat modified version is that none of the current examples appears
 to fulfill the needs of archeological study, and some of them seem to be actually
 misconceived. But above all, there is one point, consistently encountered in
 statements about culture, with which I find I must take particular issue. To
 anticipate briefly: the word culture denotes not one concept, but two. This fact
 is regularly overlooked by the culture-definers. The two concepts are related, but
 they are distinct and on two different levels of abstraction. This ambivalence is
 the source of basic misconceptions and will be the first point taken up in develop-
 ing a concept of culture for archeology.
     In the following discussion, I have made an especial attempt to keep down
 the number of quotations and references in the text. For those who might be
 interested in pursuing the topic, a bibliography is included in the Notes. But
 it has seemed conducive to a clearer presentation of my own point of view not
 to interrupt the train of argument too often with corroborative or antithetical
 documentation. I wish to thank the authors in the cited bibliography for their
 stimulating ideas and to draw attention to the obvious fact that, without their
 thoughts acting as a back-board against which to bat my own, it would have been
 impossible to develop the concept offered here. I admit to having made extensive
 use of their ideas and do not mean in any way to slight or plagiarize those who
 have fed my mental processes. Nevertheless, in these days of expediency, I
 hope my manifestly great debt will be forgiven without more specific credit for the
 sake of easier reading and more concise argumentation.*°°
     The development of a concept of culture for archeology may be inaugurated
                                          97
   98

    by making three fundamental points. First and most basic is that, as it is now
  ~ commonly used, the word culture designates two concepts: (1) a concept which
    is holistic/and used to distinguish phenomena that are “cultural” from those
    that are “natural,” i.e., organic and inorganic: biological, geological, chemical,
    etcy, and (2) a concept which is on a secondary level of abstraction, which is
   partitive, ‘which denotes a segment of the holistic concept, i.e.,)a@ culture. |The
Y  “second point is that culture is a mental phenomenon, consisting of the contents of
    minds, not of material objects or observable behavior. And the third point is that
    a “trait” or unit of culture can be either shared or idiosyncratic, i.e., it can be _
    common to many individual minds or to the mind of a single individual. These_~
    three points will be taken up in order, and their substantiation will constitute a
    reasoned development of a concept of culture.
          The archeologist who finds an oddly shaped stone during the progress of his
    excavations will ask himself whether that stone is “natural” or “cultural.” By
     this question, he means to inquire whether it is a product of human activity or
    merely a peculiar formation caused by some geologic or meteorologic force. A
     recent article in American Antiquity (Goldsmith, 1945) is at great pains to dis-
     tinguish between skulls exhibiting a pathologic anomaly called the ‘‘Catlin Mark”
     and skulls which have been modified through the act of trephining. In other
     words, the article desires to distinguish between the “cultural” and the “biologi-
    cal.” Lowie has said that “ethnology is simply science grappling with the
     phenomena segregated from the remainder of the universe as ‘cultural’ ” (1936a,
     p. 320). In effect, this is saying that there must be categorization on the basis of
     cultural as opposed to non-cultural phenomena before ethnological study can
     begin. Strong said that the major aim of anthropology is to elucidate the rela-
     tionship between “man and culture” (1936, p. 364), and Kroeber said the aim
     is to interpret those phenomena into which both “organic and social causes enter”’
      (1923, p. 3). For problems involving two factors, the primary procedure must
     be to differentiate between those factors. Thus both Kroeber and Strong imply
     that the prerequisite for anthropological study is to distinguish the cultural or
     the social from the organic and then to examine their interrelationships and
     mutual products.
          If, as seems to be the case, the cultural is to be segregated from other cate-
     gories in the problems set for themselves by the archeologists, ethnologists, and
      other students of the so-called social. sciences, then it is an absolute necessity
      that the primary breakdown of their data be made upon exactly that basis: the
      cultural and the non-cultural. The fact that non-cultural factors often impinge
      upon and influence phenomena which are considered cultural does not alter
      this requirement. The fact that culture is not literally “super-organic’”’ means
      only that there actually is a relationship between what can be defined as cultural
      and what can be defined as organic. But the crucial point is that the two sets of
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               99

    phenomena have to be defined, if only for the sake of study. If two factors are
    so hopelessly mixed that they cannot be separated, there are no means of study-
    ing their interrelationships or their individual effects upon tertiary phenomena
    into which they both enter as factors or “causes.”
         Thus it is that for all the so-called social sciences the primary breakdown of
 _ data, the first level of’ abstraction, hinges upon a concept of culture set against
    concepts of the same level, such as the organic, the inorganic, the geologic, the
  _chemical, etc. Culture must first be defined so as to discriminate between it and
    those other concepts which are on the same level of abstraction.
         The second concept of culture is on a secondary level of abstraction and
    serves to denote a culture. Whereas the first was holistic, the second is partitive.
    It designates a more or less cohesive and separable segment of that whole which
   was denoted by culture in the first sense. The first concept serves to designate what
    is cultural from what is not; the second serves to distinguish between the unitary ‘
   segments of the whole that is culture. For example, we identify Western
   European culture, Eskimo culture, or the culture of second generation Swedes
   in Minnesota. But we would be unable to partition the whole into segments
   unless we had already determined what made up that whole, i.e., what was cul-
   tural and what was not. The logical order of procedure is first to determine what.
   is cultural and then to determine whether certain of these cultural phenomena
> are such that they can acceptably be grouped into a culture.
        It may appear that discriminating between these two meanings of the word
   culture is splitting hairs, that actually we are faced with a single concept and
   its constituent parts rather than two concepts. This would be a justifiable criti-
   cism if all those particular individual cultures denoted by concept No. 2 added
   up to the whole denoted by concept No. 1. But this is not the case. The holistic
   concept is in a manner of speaking an emergent. It includes more than the sum
   of those separable segments denoted by concept No. 2. The whole that is culture
   is greater than the sum of all the particular cultures which are part of it. This
   assertion will not be defended at this time because the entire third section of
   this chapter, i.e., the one devoted to the point that culture “traits” can be
   either shared or idiosyncratic, is nothing more than such a defense. Here, only
   two aspects of a corroborative nature will be presented.
        In the first place, as far as the need to distinguish between the two concepts
   is concerned, it makes little difference whether the whole is, or is not, greater
   than the sum of its parts. The need is still present. It has been shown that we
   are dealing with two levels of abstraction when we talk of cudtwre and a culture.
   This fact alone is sufficient to make a separation worth while. This is distinctly
   so, if only in order to avoid theoretical confusion and guard against falling into
   the Fallacy of Misplaced Concreteness (Whitehead, 1927, pp. 73-86). In the
   second place, this quasi emergent quality of culture should not be difficult to
 100


 visualize, for the case here is no different from that in, say, zoology. For example,
 a sport or drastic mutation in an ornithological species may be unassignable to
 any one particular species. It may be taxonomically isolated and unclassifiable on
 a specific level, but it nevertheless must still be regarded as a bird. Thus the
 Class Aves is greater than the sum of all the members of all the identifiable
 avian species. For another example, let us imagine the offspring of a mating
 between an Eskimo and a Hottentot. This ““Hotteneskimo” could not be pigeon-
 holed with either of these “pure” biological categories. As the only one of his
 kind, he would not fall into any “racial” group. Yet, our Hotteneskimo would
 surely have to be classified as Homo sapiens, and thus he would increase by one
 the number of the whole, i.e. Mankind, while altering the statistics for the
 “races” not a whit. That this same set of circumstances is operative in the realm
 of the cultural will be shown later in this chapter.

      It should be most clearly stated that, in the following discussion, I shall be
 defining culture only as a holistic concept. The relation of the partitive to the
 holistic concept will perforce have to follow the establishment of the latter.
       The second point in this definition of the concept culture is that culture is a
_mental construct, having to do with the contents of minds and not with material
 objects or observable behavior. This contention is based on deductions from two
  premises which have assumed axiomatic character in the literature of cultural
  studies. The first is that “the prolonged infancy of man is regarded universally
  as one of the necessary conditions of culture” (Powdermaker, 1945, p. 310). As
  Linton has said (1936b, p. 72), the importance of this long period of parental
  dependency is that it permits and insures learning on the part of the infany That
_is to say, it facilitates the acquisition of mental constructs.
                                                               /Its value for culture
  most certainly does not lie in the acquisition of material objects or the accumu-
  lation of behavioral acts divorced from their mental residue. The advantages
 of a lengthy infancy are not in the collection of innumerable old shoes, building
  blocks, parts of internal combustion engines, and radio tubes. Nor is it of any
  advantage to the child to perform whole constellations of behavior without retain-
  ing in his mind a residue of ideas pertaining thereto. By themselves, neither ob-
 jects nor behavior will be of value to the infant or to culture. The important
 factor is obviously the one which remains in the mind to be carried on, modified,
 transmitted. The premise that prolonged infancy is important for culture implies
 and is based on the fact that culture is a mental phenomenon.
     The second premise is “the fact that the cultural content is a heritage of the
 past and that it is cumulative” (Goldenweiser, 1929, p. 566 fn.). The culture-
 whole existing today owes its form and at least the majority of its content to
 what is called the cultural heritage. Students of culture seem to be agreed on this.
 point. The reason we are able to progress the way we do (they say) is because
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             101


  we are able to build on pre-existing culture foundations. The reason that certain
  civilizations have flourished more than some others (they say) is because they
  have received more, or more elaborate, “culture streams.” The deductions from
 this premise are the same as from the first: culture is a mental construct and does
 not consist of material objects or observable behavior.
     The test of this contention is in an examination of the transmission of
 culture. The reason that the culture corpus is more elaborate today than
 formerly is not because of the transmission down through the ages of a lot of old
 Roman chariots or Chinese firecrackers, or because the actual acts of early
 Teutonic, Slavic, or Arabic behavior have survived, or because the actual sounds
 produced by bygone Africans have been preserved to the expansion of modern
 music. These objects and acts of the empirical world have long since passed
 away and become as nothing. What has remained to fertilize present-day culture
 are the mental components of these phenomena. The modern steamboat is based
 on Fulton’s ideas, not on physical additions to the structure of the original Cler-
 mont. Once a dance pattern has been stepped out upon the ground of some tribal
 plaza, it has gone. What remains to be passed on as a culture heritage, to be
 added to and taken from, are the mental constructs pertinent to that pattern
 and from which that pattern was derived.
     Malinowski has several times made this point (e.g., 1931). Mere physical
 form is extraneous as far as culture is concerned, being a property of the world
 of physics and not of culture. But in one place Malinowski has also maintained
 that culture “is nothing but the organized behavior of man” (1936, p. 440)
 and in another that culture is “the integral whole consisting of implements and
 consumers’ goods, of constitutional charters for the various social groupings, of
 human ideas and crafts, beliefs and customs” (1944, p. 36). These statements
 seem to encompass a large range and to controvert the limited view expressed in
 the present study. There arises the question, therefore, of the relations between
 behavior, implements, and the concept of culture as a mental phenomenon.
     According to the concept of culture being developed here, culture is a
‘Tmental construct consisting of ideas. Under the termi idea; for present purposes,
  are subsumed such categories as’attitudes, meanings, sentiments, feelings, values,
  goals, purposes, interests, knowledge, beliefs, relationships, associations,/These
  ideas are not themselves observable. They are objectified and made observable
_ through the action-systems of the body, being activated in the form of behavior
  that is observable both visually and audibly. In turn, this behavior results in
“material objects such as axes and automobiles, and non-material manifestations
 “such as dance patterns, musical tones and rhythms, styles of graphic and fictile
  representation, etc. For example, there is present in an Indian’s mind the idea
  of a dance. This is the trait of culture. This idea influences his body so that he
  behaves in a certain way. The result of this behavioral activity is the pattern of
102


the dance, the sequence of body motions, etc. Both the behavior itself and the
resulting patterns are observable, but for this very reason they are fleeting. The
culture idea is not observable but endures in the Indian’s mind to be repeated
again.                                                                         :
    Both behavior and the results of behavior, if they stem from ideas, pertain to
culture. They are not culture, but they are|“‘cultural! “Thus we are dealing with
three orders of phenomena, two of which pertain to mate and are thus cultural,
but only one of which is culture~A stone axe, a song, a dance performance are
not culture traits. They are objectifications of culture traits. The elements or
traits of culture are unobservable and must be inferred from their objectifica-
tions, from behavior or the results of behavior. This is true whether we are
dealing with data that are ethnographical, archeological, archival, verbal, ob-
servational, or whatever.
     It also follows from this that the concept of “material culture” is fallacious.
Culture is unobservable and non-material. Even behavior, although observable,
is non-material. It is only when we come down to the third order, the results of
behavior, that thereis a problem of material and non-material categories. But
this order consists only of objectifications of culture and does not constitute
culture itself. Therefore, the term material culture is a misnomer         and the
dichotomy between material and non-material relates only to observable results
of cultural behavior, not to culture itself.
    Thus it is that culture itself is completely inferential and non-experiential
from the observer’s or objective point of view. The primary data of all culture
studies, therefore, are found in categories of the second and third orders, in
cultural behavior and the material and non-material results of cultural behavior.
The implications of this fact for archeology are easily envisioned. A detailed dis-
cussion of this point, however, will be postponed until the next chapter.

     The third point in this definition of the concept of culture is that culture
traits may be either shared or idiosyncratic, belonging either to one mind or to
several individual minds. It follows that an object or a bit of behavior may be
cultural even if it is the only example of its kind in existence or ever to have
been in existence. These assertions are in contrast to the stated or implied beliefs
of the majority of those who have written on the subject of culture. Variously,
it has been said that culture is “social behavior” (Sapir, 1927, p. 117; 1938, p.
9), “social heredity” (Linton, 1936b, p. 80), or that one indispensable factor
of a trait of culture is its quality of being shared (Kluckhohn and Kelly, 1944,
pp. 4-6, 32). These views, I believe, are the result of shifting between culture
concepts No. 1 and No. 2 without making due allowance for the change in level
of abstraction. They are the result of starting to talk about culture and ending
by talking of a culture, or vice versa. For example, Linton says:
TAYLOR                        A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 103

Any item of behavior, and so on, which is peculiar to a single individual in a@ society
is not to be considered as a part of the society’s culture. ... Thus a new technique
for weaving baskets would not be classed as a part of culture as long as it was
known only to one person. (1945a, p. 35, italics mine)

I would be in agreement with his first sentence: an individual peculiarity is not
part of a society’s culture, part of a particular culture. But on the holistic level,
where the anthropologist must distinguish between what pertains to culture and
what pertains to the organic and inorganic realms, just how is this weaving
technique to be classified? It seems to make more sense to categorize it as cultural
than to say that it is biological or chemical. Whatever the decision, it is very
apparent that Linton has slipped from talking about the culture of a society,
or a culture, to talking about what is part of culture. Perhaps this is a literary
slip, but that fact in itself might be significant. It becomes more so, and one
begins to wonder if after all it was purely literary, when one finds him virtually
repeating himself by saying that “culture as a whole consists of the sum total of
a society’s patterned responses to its needs” (1936b, p. 411, italics mine). The
case begins to look even more conceptual when we find Kluckhohn and Kelly
saying:
 But culture is like a map. Just as the map isn’t the territory but an abstract representa-
 tion of the territory so also a culture is an abstract description of trends toward
 uniformity in the words, acts, and artifacts of human groups. (1944, p. 26, italics
 mine)

     For another, Murdock lists the seven basic assumptions of culture by starting
 with ‘‘culture is learned,” “culture is inculcated,” and then for his third assump-
 tion saying:
Habits of the cultural order are not only inculcated and then transmitted over time;
they are also social, that is, shared by human beings living in organized aggregates
or societies and kept relatively uniform by social pressure. They are, in short, group
habits. (1940, p. 365, italics mine)

 And again, Dollard says that “ ‘culture’ is the name given to these abstracted
  (from men) intercorrelated customs of a social group.” (1939, p. 50, italics mine)
      I believe that there is shifting from one level of abstraction to another in these
 examples, and I also have two other beliefs concerning the statements themselves:
 first, that demanding the shared or “social” criterion before archeological data
_can be considered cultural is an unworkable and impractical requirement; and
 second, that when the ethnologists and sociologists demand it for their own data,
 they are confused between the discrimination of one culture from another and
the discrimination of what is cultural from what is non-cultural. I believe that,
if they were taxed with this conceptual ambivalence, they themselves would
deny the criterion of sharing as a requisite for the holistic concept. As I will
104


attempt to show somewhat later, it is a logically untenable position and is not
held even in their own writings. First, however, I shall argue a more immediate
claim: that the requirement is unworkable and impractical for archeology.
    Let us return to the archeologist who dug up the oddly shaped stone and
wished to know whether that object pertained to his research as a student of
cultural phenomena or whether it belonged to the investigations of his colleagues
the geologists, the students of “natural” rock formations. Let us suppose that
the archeologist found (as we did in Coahuila, Mexico) the surface of the stone
to be covered with tool marks, its present shape obviously the result of carving,
and its color due to an application of red paint. And let us suppose that only
one specimen was found at the site and that no other examples were known in
archeological literature. In what category would the archeologist be justified in
classifying this specimen? According to those who would restrict the terms
culture and cultural to shared or “social” ideas and objectifications, this single
specimen could not be classified as cultural and therefore would fall outside of
the range of cultural studies. It would be foreign to the investigations of the
archeologist as a student of culture. Is this what the culture-definers have
intended? Is this stone to be rejected from consideration by ‘“‘social scientists”
and turned over to... but to whom? Does it fit more readily into the researches
of the physicists? Or is it more significant to geological studies or chemical
studies?
    Perhaps we should demand that the archeologist find another similar stone
before we permit either example to be the subject of study by students of culture.
Here the problem arises as to just how exact the likeness must be before the
two stones can be adjudged the results of a shared idea and thus attain the
status of cultural objects. Let us suppose that the archeologist does find another
similar stone. How is it to be told whether the second is the work of the same
or a different artisan? If both stones were the product of one man, they represent
but a single, unshared idea and would consequently fall into a non-cultural
category. On what grounds is the archeologist to tell whether two worked
stones were made by two individuals? Does the closeness of similarity indicate
a single artisan or a single idea shared by two craftsmen? Does a difference
indicate a change in one man’s idea or skill, or does it signify a single idea in the
minds of two men but subject to variations in skill? These questions must receive
an answer if we are to determine whether an idea is shared and whether material
objects are indicative of a shared idea. It is rare or impossible that the, inferences
necessary to such answers can be made from archeological materials without an
unconditional surrender to purely subjective, unsupported, and non-testable
hypotheses. In ethnology, sociology, and other disciplines working on living socie-
ties and with living informants, such hypotheses can be checked and validated,
but with archeological materials this is out of the question.
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               105

      In other words, whatever the case may be for living societies, the requirement
 that an idea must be shared to be cultural is not a practical criterion for arche-
 ology. It serves no purpose for the ethnologists to insist that archeologists cry
 for the moon or that the archeologists themselves should seek it. Archeological
 materials at best are meager and, having run an almost mortal gauntlet between
 the ranks of preservation and excavation techniques, they are in no condition
 to be attacked from what should be a friendly flank. If the archeologist is pre-
 vented from treating as cultural all those finds of which he has been unfortunate
 —or fortunate—enough to discover only one example, he is being further and
 probably disastrously handicapped. If, beyond this, he must disregard, as non-
 cultural, even those multiple specimens for which a shared idea cannot ac-
 ceptably be inferred from the archeological data, the archeologist might as well
 shut up shop. He will better employ his efforts merely collecting pots and other
 objets dart. As a discipline deaiing with cultural phenomena, archeology is
 finished; in fact it never started!
     Some may argue that this is exactly the present status of archeology. Perhaps
many would say that archeology can serve the “social sciences” by developing
the time and space coordinates of the past irrespective of cultural content, but
that as a student of culture the archeologist is out of the running. I believe
that this would be an unfair judgment. I believe that archeology can provide some
very important data for the study of culture. If it can be demonstrated to the
general satisfaction that this criterion of sharing is an unwarranted restriction,
even in non-archeological researches such as ethnology and sociology, then
much of the foundation for this derogation of archeology will be shorn away. If
the demand that a culture trait be a shared trait can be assigned to a confusion
between concepts of culture No. 1 and No. 2, between concepts of culture as a
whole and a culture, then the argument will fail, and the archeologist may pro-
ceed with his work as a student of culture and things cultural.
     In not a few anthropological and sociological monographs, we find statements
which, in effect, say that ‘“‘culture always, and necessarily, satisfies basic biologi-
cal needs and secondary needs derived therefrom” (Murdock, 1940, p. 366).
This same thesis has been expounded many times by Malinowski (e.g., 1931;
1944, Chaps. 9-13). If culture is in any way responsive to biological needs and
if we must accept the “social” or sharing criterion, how is it that an idea which
is common to, and caters to the biological needs of, several individuals is culture,
while an idea which caters to the needs of one individual is not? Are we to
imagine a Group Biology which creates culture and an Individual Biology which
creates something else? Is this not perilously near to the repudiated “Group
Mind” type of thinking? I do not think that the culture-definers intend this
conclusion to be drawn from their work. There is some misunderstanding here,
and I suggest that it lies in a failure to recognize a holistic concept of culture.
106


     To take another example, we note that La Barre (1938, pp. 111ff) says
that the Kiowa appear to have obtained the peyote cult from the Mescalero
Apache, that in 1868 or 1870 Big Horse was the only Kiowa using the narcotic,
and that by 1886 Mooney found the Kiowa as a group embracing the cult.
How do these facts throw light on the present discussion? Taking the sharing
criterion as our standard for the moment, we find that peyotism was shared
by the Mescalero as a group and was, therefore, a “trait of culture.” By 1886,
it was also shared among the Kiowa and was thus a “trait of culture.” But what
was the situation between those dates? To an investigator of the Kiowa in 1868,
there was but a single individual using peyote. Peyote represented an unshared,
idiosyncratic idea. If that investigator did not happen to have the Mescalero
data at hand, he would have been forced into the position of saying: “Peyotism
belongs only to Big Horse; it is idiosyncratic and therefore non-cultural; I am a
student of culture and should investigate only what pertains to culture; there-
fore, this peyote business is no concern of mine; I will forget about it.”
     I believe that there would be general agreement that when Big Horse alone
practiced it, peyotism was not a part of Kiowa culture. But was peyotism, there-
fore, noncultural? Was the ethnologist justified in rejecting the evidence of
peyotism as impertinent to his studies? If he had rejected it, would he not have
been losing important evidence which did, in fact, pertain to cultural studies,
even if at that time, and to him, it did not show signs of being shared? Can a
single idea be alternately cultural and non-cultural in a holistic sense? If so,
what does it become when it is no longer cultural?
      Suppose for a moment that by 1868 the peyote cult had disappeared from
 Mescalero life and that Big Horse was the only living practitioner. Would it
 then have no importance or significance to ethnologists? Can an idea, whose
 antecedents and whose descendants both are admitted to be traits of culture,
 suddenly change and require classification in some other category on the same
 level of abstraction? While Big Horse’s idea cannot be considered a part of
 Kiowa culture in 1868, I maintain that his idea was even at that time a trait
 of culture in the holistic sense. Yet the culture-definers say that “to be cultural,
 it must be shared.” What they really mean is: “to be part of a culture, it must
 be shared.” They fail to recognize that some phenomena, which may be cultural
 in the sense that they are not organic or geological or some such, at the same
 time may not be a part of some particular, separable segment of the whole that
 is culture.
      All individual instances of a shared trait are usually not experienced by the
 investigator simultaneously. The normative or shared character of these instances
 must be pieced together from many multiple observations over what is possibly
 a long period of time or a considerable range of space. The individual cases,
 therefore, although they may appear idiosyncratic for the time being, must be
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               107

recorded in order even to ascertain any shared or normative characteristics.
The ethnologists do this very thing and thus admit, if only tacitly, that
individual cases are grist to their mill. By doing this, they further admit that
single instances are cultural in the holistic sense, whether or not they are
eventually found to be cultural with respect to the particular segment of the
culture-whole that is béing investigated.
    In short, it does not seem that the idiosyncratic can be overlooked in studies
of culture. It is the basis for the development of the normative or shared.
Linton, it seems to me, assumes an untenable position when he says:
Individual Peculiarities cannot be classed as a part of culture, in the sense in which
the term is ordinarily used, since they are not shared by any of a society’s members.
At the same time they are of extreme importance in cultural dynamics since they
are the starting point of everything which later becomes incorporated into culture.
(1936b, p. 274, italics mine)

His shifting from one level of abstraction to another is very clear in this state-
ment. It is also apparent that what he means by culture ‘‘in the sense in which
the term is ordinarily used” is a culture, not culture as opposed to the “natural,”
the “biological,” etc. How something which is “the starting point of everything
which later becomes incorporated into culture” is not to be considered as cultural,
pertaining to culture, is difficult to understand. What is it then? If it is not
pertinent, if it is not cultural in some sense or other, may we be permitted to dis-
regard it in our cultural studies? For one who has written that:
Except in the most superficial terms, the workings of society and culture cannot be
understood without constant reference to the needs and capacities of the individual.
(1945d, p. v)

this refusal to admit that Individual Peculiarities constitute culture, at least in
some sense, is indeed a paradox. Further, Linton says:
Individual Peculiarities occupy somewhat the same position with regard to culture
that individual mutations occupy with regard to a biological species. (1936b, p. 274)

In the first place, he equates culture as a whole with a species, whereas the
equation should have been between a culture and a species. Furthermore, while
mutations may have little importance as far as species or other particular taxo-
nomic categories are concerned, they are still classifiable and of importance to
more generalized taxonomic groupings. To cite but one simple example, a muta-
tion produced by parents of the species Falco sparverius sparverius (the Spar-
rowhawk) might not be assignable on a rigid taxonomic basis to that species.
But it might very well be assignable to the genus Falco or to the family Fat-
CONIDAE, and the very fact that a species of Falco had a tendency to produce
mutations might be of considerable interest and significance to ornithologists
108


studying the genus or the family. The range and number of mutations within
the species of the genus, the direction of the variation, the geographic and eco-
logical relationships and signficance, all are factors of importance to a student
of the genus Falco—whether or not the individual bird can be assigned to the
species sparverius or not.
    Similarly, just because some idea or man-made object is not shared and can-
not, therefore, be assigned to a particular culture, we are not justified in saying
that it has no significance for the study of culture, in short, that it is not cultural.
Are we to believe that the range of individual variation from a shared or norma-
tive trait is of no significance in cultural studies? And if it is of significance in
actual fact, then is not the individual variation cultural? Logically, for one
phenomenon    to have significance for another within a particular field of study,
both phenomena must lie within a single frame of reference, at least for the
purpose of that study. Some common denominator is required before comparisons
and relationships can have significance. When a mouse is compared with the
Empire State building, some common ground for pertinence must be established,
weight, cubic content, location, etc. It would be useless to compare them on
the basis of whiskers or eye color. Thus, if idiosyncratic ideas or objects have
significance for other ideas or objects within the framework of culture studies,
it must be assumed that both the idiosyncratic and the normative are within the
realm of culture. Therefore, traits of culture and objectifications of culture
traits may be either idiosyncratic or shared.
     In point of actual fact, as it is used today by the ethnologists, this criterion
of sharing is based on the implicit premise that the sharing be within a culture,
a society. Although they do not specifically make the point, they obviously do
not mean that any idea which is the possession of more than a single mind is
“social” and to be designated as a culture trait in their terms. It is assumed that
the sharing will be within the confines of one of those separable segments which
they have identified as societies or cultures. This was the conclusion reached by
the analysis of Kiowa peyotism above (p. 106). I will give another, brief ex-
ample, part fictional and part factual.
     During the recent war I had occasion to teach the disassembly and assembly
of the Colt .45 caliber pistol. During the course of this teaching I worked out
two minor short-cuts in the operation. Among my students were a Gurkha from
India, a Frenchman from Marseilles, a Navaho from New Mexico. Let us suppose
either that these men were the only ones to whom I taught the short-cuts or
that they were the only survivors of those who received this special instruction.
When they returned home and once more took up the life and culture of their
own people, what would be the status of the idea concerning the two short-cuts? It
would be a shared idea. But would this fact of itself be enough to make the
idea ‘“‘social”? Would similar handling of the Colt .45 by single individuals in
France, India, and the United States be enough to satisfy the criterion of “social
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                109

  behavior” or shared behavior? I believe not. If, on the other hand, once the
  Gurkha got home he taught the tricks to his fellows, and the short-cuts spread
  to many thousands of Gurkha soldiers, what then would be the status? I believe
  that then the idea would be considered to be part of Gurkha (military) culture,
  a socially shared idea and thus a part of culture according to the culture-definers.
  But this example has shown that a critical factor is not sharing per se, but rather
  the sharing by a culture, @ society. In other words, the criterion of sharing is
  itself premised on sharing within a separable, unitary segment of culture. The
  criterion of sharing operates on a lower, partitive level of abstraction. It pertains
  to culture concept No. 2.
       If the anthropologists, sociologists, and other culture-definers insist that the
  term culture be reserved for those phenomena which are shared and “social,”
  they will have to do one of two things. They will either have to recognize the
  difference between the holistic and partitive usages of the term and make the
  distinction clear in their thinking and writing, or they will have to find another
  name by which to refer to the holistic concept. The property of being shared
  must not implicitly and erroneously be demanded of phenomena which are
  cultural in the holistic sense. If it is realized, as Bidney has done, that
       . a particular cultural trait may be either individual or social; . . . [and that]
   cultural behavior may be socially acquired by man as a member of society without
_ being social or common to all members of his group. (1944, p. 35)

  there will probably be no need to burden the literature with another term. Never-
  theless, it is of the utmost importance for archeology and other disciplines deal-
  ing with cultural matters to make, and keep clear, the distinction in levels of
  thinking between the holistic and the partitive concepts of culture.

     The three points have now been made: (1) the term culture stands for two
 concepts, one holistic and the other partitive; (2) a trait of culture in the holistic
 sense may be either shared or idiosyncratic, but in the partitive sense it must
 be shared; (3) the concept of culture designates a mental construct consisting
 of ideas. These are but three factors in the definition I propose to develop for
 archeology.
     From this juncture onward, however, I shall be following, with merely
 minor modifications, the arguments brought forward by Kluckhohn and Kelly
 (1944). I shall, in part, use their terminology and shall imply by this procedure
 that their arguments express my views and may be used to justify the present
 definition. And as I have already said, the concept defined will be the holistic one
 unless otherwise stated.
     A “descriptive” concept of x tells what x “consists of.” By culture as a
|descriptive concept,|I mean all those mental constructs or ideas which have been
learned or created after birth by an individual. As I said above, for the present
110


purposes the term idea! includes such categories as attitudes, meanings, senti-
ments, feelings, values, goals, purposes, interests, knowledge, beliefs, relationships,
associations. I have not used Kluckhohn’s and Kelly’s factor of “designs” be-
cause, whether they meant it so or not, the word has overtones of the sharing
criterion which has been repudiated as a factor in the holistic concept ofculture.
    An “explanatory” concept of « tells what « “does.” By culture as an explana-
tory concept I mean all those mental constructs which are used to understand,
and to react to, the experiential world of internal and external stimuli. In this,
I have rejected Kluckhohn’s and Kelly’s use of the word men because it begs
the question, not yet settled to the general satisfaction, of whether non-human
animals can be said to have culture. Also I have not used their factor of “proc-
 esses” since I believe that processes such as diffusion, culture contact, and
 acculturation (which they name) do not constitute culture. They are sometimes
 cultural in that they pertain to culture, but they are by no means confined only
 to that category. Diffusion, for example, is a concept which denotes either a
 dynamic force or the state resulting from a dynamic force. It may mean the act
 of diffusing or the results of having diffused, and the concept may refer to culture,
 to plants, to animals, or even to such objects as glacial erratics. The concept of
 diffusion is merely the designation for a set of relationships existing between
 certain phenomena which may be ideas, objectifications of ideas, rocks, elephants,
 or whatever. Culture itself consists of ideas, not processes. In the same way, an en-
 gine consists of pistons and spark plugs, not of combustion or electrical energy.
      By a culture, i.e., by culture as atpartitive concept, I mean a historically de-
 rived system of culture traits which is a more or less separable and cohesive Seg-
 ment of the-whole-that-is-culture and whose separate traits tend to be shared by all
 or by specially designated individuals of a group or “society.” This concept must
 be distinguished from the holistic concepts which were defined in the first two
 definitions above. Except for word changes which I believe to be minor, there
 is no difference between this and the definition given by Kluckhohn and Kelly.
      To summarize: culture consists of the increments which have accrued to
individual minds after birth—when the increments of a sufficient number of
 minds are enough alike, we say we are dealing with a culture. Culture traits are
 manifested by cultural agents through the medium of vehicles; to borrow Soro-
 kin’s terms (1943, pp. 4ff). In the case of human culture, these agents are human
 beings; the cultural vehicles are the objectifications of culture, i.e., the observa-
 ble behavior and the results of behavior. Cultural processes are the dynamic fac-
  tors involving culture traits; they do not constitute culture but comprise the
 relationships between culture traits.

     Culture, consisting as it does of mental constructs, is not directly observable.
 It cannot, therefore, constitute the empirical data of any discipline. Culture can
 be studied only through the instrumentality of observable phenomena, through
 TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               111

_what have been called the objectifications of culture: cultural behavior and the
 material and non-material results of such behavior. A tribal dance, the avoidance
 of a woman by her son-in-law, the identical appellation used between a small
 child and an old man, the designs of a Navaho sandpainting, a stone axe, all
 these are observable phenomena. The culture ideas behind them can only be
 inferred. Even the statéments of a living informant do not empirically demon-
 strate and establish the ideas they allege to reproduce. Checking and cross-
 checking of informants is a common practice and a vital requirement. Its purpose
 is to attain by progressive stages an ever closer approximation to the actual idea
 held in the informant’s mind. But whether or not the idea is ever exactly repro-
 duced cannot be a matter of certain demonstration. It remains always in the
 realm of plausible inference. If the inference explains other phenomena satis-
 factorily and if it serves as a practical and trustworthy premise for logical
 reasoning and the explanation of observable fact, then it may be accepted as an
 approximation of a culture idea. It is only to this extent that any culture trait
 may be ascertained.
      The method is one of successively nearer approximations. Conclusive assur-
 ance or exact knowledge is forever out of reach. It develops into a question of
 continued testing and modification in order to reduce error and attain a closer
 correspondence between inference and actual idea. It is for this reason, if for no
 other, tha context |is of such tremendous importance in all culture studies. If it
 were possible empirically to test inferences about culture ideas merely by some
 laboratory experiment which would produce a definitive answer, context would
 be of much less value. For example, the mineral cobalt, when subjected to blow-
 pipe analysis involving borax and sodium metaphosphate beads, invariably gives
 a blue flame in either oxidizing or reducing atmosphere. This is a very delicate
 and sure test. If by some such empirical procedure we could obtain as conclusive
 knowledge about the ideas which gave rise to a certain Navaho sandpainting, the
 constant checking and modification, the continual recourse to cultural context
 would be eliminated or, at least, much curtailed. But we have no such open-
 and-shut tests for mental constructs. We must turn to other procedures. In effect,
 we must say: “A set of observed facts leads us to make a given inference. How does
 this inference fit and explain other related observations: not at all, exactly, or
 askew? If askew, in what direction and what modification can be made to bring it
  more in line? How does the modified inference fit yet other empirical data imping-
  ing upon the current frame of reference? If exactly or not at all, is this coincidental
  or can we assume actual correspondence? We shall need to check other aspects of
  the context.” And so it goes. The testing and alterations require an ever increasing
  circle of context.
       This context consists of two sets of data: first, the objectifications of culture
   (behavior and results of behavior) ;second, those culture traits which have been
, accepted as plausible or which are assumed as plausible for the sake of the im-
 112


   mediate investigation. In addition, the relationships between objectifications and
   traits, between objectifications themselves, and between traits themselves are of
   intrinsic concern in the development of a cultural context. By the term relation-
   ships is meant, for example, such factors as the connection between ideas of eco-
   nomic value and the behavior of parents in giving and receiving wedding ex-
   changes, the relation of designs on Pueblo pottery to Pueblo kiva paintings, the
   concordance between concepts of the supernatural and empirical knowledge of
   the natural environment, the relative quantitative utilization of stone and bone
   or of animal and vegetal foods, the relative care displayed in the manufacture of
   ceremonial and utilitarian goods, etc. In other words, in addition to the de-
   scription of cultural behavior and its results, a cultural context consists of the
_ associations and relations of these elements, of the balance between them, of their
   relative quantitative and qualitative positions within the whole.
       It is not being too pedantic to point out that there is a difference, in the
   conceptual scheme proposed here, between a cultural context and a/culture con-
   text. \The former has just been described. The latter consists of a context of
   inferred ideas, of configurations of mental constructs. Historiographies, whether
 derived from documentary, ethnographic, or archeological materials, when they
 attain the level of context, are cultural, and not culture, contexts. To be sure,
 ideas and their relationships are often part of such writings. They serve many
 times to tie together and give integration and balance to the recorded acts of
 behavior and results of behavior. But they are secondary to the primary purpose
 of a historiography, which is to elucidate, not the ideas which structure the par-
 ticular culture, but rather the observable and recorded phenomena, to offer
 some explanation for their actuality, to integrate the cultural picture which the
 investigator wishes to paint. The difference between historiographies and culture
 studies is one of the degree to which emphasis is placed on objectifications of
 culture traits or on the traits themselves. The difference lies in the purposes and
 end-results of research. Here, we come back once more to the points raised in
 Chapter 2 above. Many historians use culture traits, i.e., inferred mental con-
 structs, to help them interpret and fill out their cultural picture of past actuality.
 Likewise cultural anthropologists use cultural contexts, and they develop their
 inferences about the culture of the particular people and about culture in general
 therefrom. The two disciplines use the same range of materials but have different
 emphases and aims.
                                 CH ARAERS 5
      THE NATURE        OF ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA:             TYPOLOGY       AND
                              CLASSIFICATION
                        Sd



  flBeas materials upon which the archeologist must work are restricted. Never-
        theless, while the cultural contexts of ethnography, sociology, and his-
  toriography may thus be fuller and broader, it should be pointed out that they
  are not to be considered ciwture-contexts any more than those of archeology.
_ Students of written documents and of the living, as well as the archeologists,
_must rely on inferences from cultural contexts to construct a culture-context or
  to attain understanding of culture and its workings. Therefore, the difference |
_between archeology and the other disciplines lies in the fullness of their re-
  spective materials and in the number, and potential corroboration, of the infer-
  ences derived therefrom, not in the inability of archeology and the ability of
  the others to obtain immediate knowledge of culture itself. The difference is
  thus one of degree and not of kind.*°*
      The archeological materials are restricted both as to quantity and range of
 representation. In the first place, as in all cultural studies, the archeologist can
 empirically deal only with objectifications of culture. But his data are further
 reduced because behavior is transitory and does not “‘fossilize.’’ Therefore the
archeologist is dependent upon the results of behavior. Even here there is re-
 striction. The non-material results of behavior, i.e., the forms of dances, the
 cadences and rhythms of song, the patterns of religious ritual do not endure.
 There remain for the archeologist’s study only the material results of behavior,
 and only such of these as have withstood the inroads of man and the elements.
      However, there is one source of archeological data, not mentioned above and,
 oddly enough, rarely mentioned or fully utilized in archeological literature. I
 refer to what may be called the affinities existing between the material remains:
 between individual cultural objects, between groups of objects, between objects
 and the natural environment. These affinities are as much facts and as much
 integral parts of the archeological data as are the material objects themselves.
 For example, the fact that a particular bone tool has been found within a
 certain coiled basket is to be dealt with in a manner exactly comparable to the
 fact that there existed at the site a bone tool and a basket. That there is a three-
 to-one ratio between axes and celts.in a site or region is just as much a bit of
archeological data as that axes and celts were present. The circumstance that a
shell came from the Pacific Ocean is to be reckoned with just as much as that
 the shell formed part of a necklace. If the archeologist does not specifically
search for, and consciously make use of, these affinities, he is overlooking a great
                                         113
 114


 proportion of his already meager data. Often they lie hidden to the casual eye
 within the cultural and natural contents of an archeological site. But without
 them there is possible only description and superficial quantification of material
 objects; interpretations must depend on only a fraction of the potential evi-
 dence; and the result is a flat and shallow picture which foreswears even those
 few integrating factors which have survived the swath of time. The general
 neglect of these affinities seems to be the greatest failing of Americanist arche-
 ology in the United States. Evidence for this viewpoint has been presented in
 Cha
   napter 3 of the present study.
   | Archeological _ data, then, consist of ther material results of cultural be-
 havior) and the affinities—quantitative, qualitative, spatial, etc——which can be
found to exist among them, and between them and the natural environment.
But mere description of these phenomena cannot satisfy the requirements of
 archeological study—if the archeologist is bent upon writing history or studying
 culture. Description must be made, to be sure; but there is also the need for
 interpretation and synthesis. The empirical facts which have been produced by
 a archeologist’s spade and the affinities between them must be interpreted in
   “cultural sense” and combined into a cultural context. The significance of the
 een             facts for the life and custom of the site must be drawn by,~infer-
 ence. ‘This is the work of ¢onstruction which falls to the archeologist.
     An archeological cultural context} therefore, is based upon material results of
 cultural behavior and their affinities. On the other hand, it consists of a presenta-
 tion, in narrative or synoptic form, of the life-ways characteristic of the former
 occupants of the site, component, area under investigation. It should be most
 emphatically stated that it does not consist of a series of descriptions and
 quantifications under what may be termed empirical categories.
     There is a most definite and important distinction to be made between
 empirical and cultural categories. The former include such rubrics as Stone, Bone,
 Objects of Copper, Environment. The latter include Food, Dress, Hunting, Textile
 Industry, Utilization of Environment, Containers, Transportation. In fact, one
 may make a very trenchant comparison between the empirical categories of
 almost any standard archeological monograph and the cultural headings found
 in such a work as the Outline of Cultural Materials (Murdock et al., 1945).
 “Cultural headings” may, in some ways, be equated with the “trait complexes”
 or “activities” as described by Linton (1936b, p. 397ff).
      Empirical categories have their very specific place in archeological studies
 and reports, but they do not comprise, either singly or in the aggregate, what
 may properly be called a cultural context. This point will be treated at some
 length later in this chapter. Here it is sufficient to indicate that an archeological
 cultural context, by the very nature of the basic materials, is constructed by
 inference to a greater extent, perhaps, than contexts based on written or living
TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               115

sources. But there is no other means to construct them, and without contexts there
is no way either to write history or to study culture. Therefore it behooves the
archeologist not to maintain the untenable position of “sticking to the facts,”
meaning the renunciation of inference, hypothesis, and testing. It rather is
incumbent upon him to derive his observational data as objectively as possible,
to differentiate between observed fact and derived inference, to make explicitly
labeled interpretations of as detailed and full a nature as possible, and then to
look, either in the ground or among the data at hand, for evidence by which
his hypotheses may be tested. Thus, more interpretation is called for, not less!
If his readers find fault with his conclusions, they have but to examine the
observational data and make their own inferences or set about producing, from
the ground or elsewhere, more empirical evidence upon which to base alternative
interpretations.

     The question of the difference between empirical and cultural categories
brings us face to face with the problems of archeological typology, classification,
and so-called culture classification. But before it will be possible to enter upon
a discussion of these problems, it will first be necessary to make a somewhat
arbitrary distinction between the concept of type and the concept of class, be-
tween typology and classification. The purpose of this discrimination is, once
more, to offer a conceptual scheme whereby the processing of archeological data
will be clarified. Once the steps of procedure are known for what they are,
their validity and pertinence can more easily be tested. By establishing concepts
and showing their mutual relationships, even if the concepts are thought to be
overly precise, the muddied waters of archeological theory will be settled, and
the light, whatever it is, will have more chance of penetrating. “Hair-splitting”’
seems to be anathema to some archeologists but, even more, an implicit and
confused conceptual scheme is anathema to straight thinking and acceptable
results.
     As used in the present conceptual scheme, type and class are concepts of dif-
ferent orders, and each may be empirical or cultural depending on the nature
of the criteria used. The accompanying tabular presentation will serve to make
this clear and also to bring out graphically the other points which will be discussed
below. (See Table 1)
     In this table, the borrowing of concepts from Linton (form, item, use, func-
tion, meaning), Kluckhohn (configuration), and Rouse (designs, techniques,
specifications, group and modal types, mode) has been adaptive in nature and
not precisely exact. Therefore considerable explanation is called for in order
to justify their use in the present scheme.
     Linton’s concepts of form, use, function, and meaning (1936b, pp. 402ff)
were originally developed with specific regard to trait complexes and not to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   116




                                IVOIMIdny       SAIMOOALVD                               TVANLITAD     SdTaOOaLV,)                                             AANITAD                        SIMOOALVD
                                                                               ATaVvie
                                                                               VT
                                            (jeuoreaAtesqg)                                      (Iewerazuy)                                                               (TetUarajUT)

                      [eENPIAIpPUT     ‘SUOT}e}SajIUeUI
                                             ITY} “Wd
                 jeotid     satjiuyye
                                 pue Ilay}        yusn}1}suod                   padioyut                                                            ‘Bapl-ainjjNnd   9y}
                                                                     pue                      Jo/pue                                                   ay}
WaOT         ‘syed              SUBUIIA,,
                                  «¢            S99NqU}IB,,
                                                  «     -9Pp,,                                   ue                                                        94}                                      “EJSOPURU
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -qO UL
                                                                         Jo                         JAed                                               UL
               ,,“SUBIS                suoeoyioeds,,
                                          ;                          ,.asn,,                                                                               OS[e
             ‘                          ‘                                anbruyseq               Jo                                                    payryol
                    «¢
                 SUISYL,, O39                                                                                                                                                                           JsaflUPI
                                                                                se
                                                                             [eNpTA                     oy}
                                                                                              ,uoljoUny,,
                                                                                                 aInjovJnueU                                        ayy fu0T]               [ENPIAIPUL
                                                                                                    10)                                   9POul,,
                                                                                                                                          V«¢
                                                                                                                                           40                                                    ‘Jie1}-91N}[Nd
                                                              Byep   ay,        /(jo                                                                                            ,.SUTURIT,,
       y         dnoi3
                     Jo                suolze}sayiuew
                                              yotqM-sod y        dnois
                                                                    jo                  suoneysasiueu
                                                                                             yey} -sod     dyy,     9y} -Ipul [eourduia
                                                                                                                           -a104}
                                                                                                                       vapt-ain}jno ‘payioaf{qo
                                                                                                                                             Jo/pue
                                                                                                        Woy)
                                                                                                    UoVeysoytueUI
           ssas        urejis0    payioeds                 ssas
                                                   ur)soryirepimts   urez199    peyloods       Soles94}
                                                                                                     U.              ,SUTUPOU,, YsoftueW
                                                                                                                                   UI B@     g[suls
AdAL
   |        i0yq}          Sarjtuyye 410/pue                                 )     (73          uorjoung,,
                                                                                                   ¢
                                                   Juanzysu0d
                                                            I13y}       polioyur ‘asn,,          C
                                                                                                            dh oyyto           I0
                                                                                                                            peourdars “TeIn}[Nd
                                                                                                                                             uy
              ‘sj1ed
                  Jo           [eeprjue” paypeysqy -9194}       10/pue      anbruyse}
                                                                               jo               ‘ginqorynueul   OdAJIYIIL,,
                                                                                                                  ¢,
             WO} Jay}1a ‘uvoul ‘Tepour    Jo       ‘ueIpaul

       y          dnoi3
                     jo           yeoutdura
                                         sad4}10)    sadA4jy       dnois
                                                                      yo     sad4q10)    sodA}pue     (sui1oy ayy,          vapt-ainqynd ‘payisefqo  Jo/pue
           pue       (SuIO}jey}      ssassod ure}199 -1oads     194310      yeotidura
                                                                                Jo         ‘yeinqjno
                                                                                                 ey} -sod dt}             ,SUTUROUT,, qsojtuRU
                                                                                                                                           UT &      ‘ssejo
           poy                   Ul
                            satjuepMts Itsy}         SalyIUyessas       urez190      paywods       solyeyIUs 19y}10
                                                                                                      UL                     Jo
                                                                                                                          yeotdu9 [eInq[Nd   UY      -aYyoie,,
ssvIg
  |              10/pue         IYsouseIp “ellay1Ia            Il9y}       Polayul .{asn,,            «
                                                                                                     UOIUNY,, ,,’SSPTO Woyoy}          sassep>d JapunSTy}
                      jo
                   surdnoi3 ‘sdnoiz                               10/pue      onbruyse}
                                                                                  jo              ‘oInjovynurw Suiprayoie    peroiq     ‘ysnous
                                                                                                                                            31 st    -qoid
                                                                                                              ATqe ysaq0}         9JVUSISap
                                                                                                                                       JY}           SULNJONIS
                                                                                                              BPI BSB                UOTRINSYUOS,,
                                                                                                                                      ;
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               117

  individual manifestations. Nevertheiess, there seems to be no reason why they
  cannot be applied to single objectifications. Linton was concerned with “func-
  tional studies” of whole cultures and was speaking from the viewpoint of the
  society itself and not of the ethnographer. But the definitions he has given may
  be paraphrased, with equally applicable results, into an archeological frame of
  reference. For example, he says:
  The form of a trait complex will be taken to mean the sum and arrangement of its
  component behavior patterns; in other words that aspect of the complex whose
  expressions can be observed directly and which can, therefore be transmitted from
  one society to another. (1936b, p. 403)

   Converting this concept into one serviceable for archeology, we find the defini-
   tion to read something as follows: The: lempirical form of an archeological mani-
   festation will be taken to mean the sum and arrangement of its component
   chemico-physical parts taken together with its empirical affinities ; im other words
_ that aspect of the phenomenon, whose expression can belobserved directlLy | ‘and
   which, therefore, can be utilized as empirical data by the archeologist. Thus the
   form of any archeological representation includes not only its “design,” “tech-
  nique,” and “specifications” as Rouse has indicated (1939, p. 11) but_also its
   associations and position relative to other cultural and natural phenomena, i.e.,
yits affinities. )
—      "When fe concept form is understood as a cultural rather than an empirical
   category, the following definition may be used: The (cultural form of an
   archeological phenomenon will be taken to mean its technique of manufacture
   and its|use
            useand function |within the body of cultural activities of the particular
 human {group under investigation, as inferred from its empirical form.   The em-
 ployment of Linton’s concepts use and function is more exact than in the case of
 form. He says:
 The use of any culture element is an expression of its relation to things external
 to the social-cultural configuration; its function is an expression of its relation to
 things within that configuration. Thus an axe has a use or uses with respect to ihe
 natural environment of the group, i.e., to chop wood. It has functions with respect
 both to the needs of the group and the operation of other elements within the culture
 configuration. It helps to satisfy the need for wood and makes possible a whole
 series of woodworking patterns. (1936b, p. 404)

 Other than changing the word culture to cultural and making a reservation as
 to his use of the term configuration, we may apply Linton’s concepts to archeo-
 logical data without modification. The use and function of any empirical form
 as well as the technique by which it was made/must depend upon inference. /
 Therefore, cultural forms are inferential in archeological studies. The same is not.
 true in ethnographical investigations, for in these the investigator may directly
 118


 observe the use, function, and making of at least a good number of the empirical
 forms.
     Rouse’s concept) ‘mode hhas been adapted to the present scheme and denotes
 “form” as a culture- -category or a mental construct. Rouse himself appears to use
 the term to denote both the actual attributes observed by the archeologist (1939,
 p. 11) as well as “ccconcéptual patterns set up by the archeologist to represent
“ideas )possibly held by the artisan” (1939, p. 15, italics mine). I have chosen
 to have the term mode stand for Tdeas rather ee for physical attributes or
 both, because I believe that in this way an important point is clarified and
 emphasized, namely, the mental nature of culture itself as opposed to the
 chemico-physical and behavioral nature of the objectifications of culture. Also
 by this means, the chances of falling into the fallacy of misplaced concreteness,
 of confusing between two levels of abstraction, are reduced.
     The concept meaning was also defined by Linton in connection with his trait
 complexes. He said:
 The meaning of a trait complex consists of the associations which any society attaches
 to it. Such associations are subjective and frequently unconscious. They find only
 indirect expression in behavior and therefore cannot be established by purely objective
 methods. (1936b, pp. 403-404)

     It is, perhaps, a debatable question whether or not archeologists can derive
 “meanings” from their data. Although, in the final chapter of the present study,
 I shall attempt to demonstrate that this is indeed possible, here the question is
 not of immediate concern. It is enough to say that, if the derivations are possible,
 then Linton’s concept is usable for archeology. It need only be pointed out that
 “expression in behavior” in archeological terms means “expression in results of
 behavior.” These results are themselves empirical, but inferences are required to
 derive meanings. Hence Linton’s last statement is perfectly applicable.
     The concept type as defined in the above table represents very closely the
 concept which A. D. Krieger advocated in his paper The Typological Concept.
 He says:
 Any group which may be labeled a “type” must embrace material which can be
 shown to consist of individual variations in the execution of a definite constructional
 idea; likewise, the dividing lines between a series of types must be based upon
 demonstrable historical factors, not, as is often the case, upon the inclinations of
 the analyst or the niceties of descriptive orderliness. (1944, p, 272)

 When he argues the importance of “demonstrable historical factors” he is advo-
 cating, in the terms of the present conceptual scheme, the study of those affinities
 which were said above to comprise archeological data equal in importance with
 purely chemico-physical characteristics. In other words, Krieger has obviously
 felt the need both to regard archeological specimens as objectifications of ideas
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                119


_ and to demand      that their Foe ahar       and relationships be included in any
 _typological treatment. af
      The distinction between an ideal or modal type and one which is composed
  of the actual objects has been made by Rouse. It seems a valid and important
  one and is, therefore, included in the present scheme. He says:
  In current anthropological literature, the term “type” seems to have been applied
  to at least two different concepts, a group of artifacts or an abstract kind of artifact
  which symbolizes the group. .. . [The latter concept] refers to the attributes which
  artifacts of a given kind have in common, not to the artifacts themselves. (1939, p. 11)

  A type which is, in effect, the abstract least-common-denominator, median, mode,
    or mean of a series of empirically similar and associated artifacts has much
   value in the course of archeological study (see Osgood, 1942, p. 24, fn. 8).
    For example, it is only through the medium of such abstractions that we can
    hope to infer the ideas which lay in the minds of the former artisans and thus
    attain an insight into their culture. It is those attributes which a group of
    specimens have in common that provide data for an interpretation of the maker’s
   ideas and conceptualizations. A single specimen or a group of specimens, however
    well described in their heterogeneity and variability, cannot provide these data.
    Even the use and function, i.e., the basis for the cultural type, often cannot be
    interpreted mithout the a oeeriam of an ideal type. By an analysis of the
  [central tendency |Wwithin a series of artifacts, it is frequently possible to obtain
__an insight into their basic and requisite features and thus to make a hypothesis
a~~ as to the ideas, the purposes, aims, beliefs, etc., which influenced the original
  makers.
       Also it is possible from such ideal types to note the range of variation
 _and the dispersal around the central concept. From this it may be possible to
   make some inferences as to the integration of the particular type within the
  culture. For example, the hypothesis may be made that a type which shows
   great homogeneity in all its elements and associations is better integrated into
   the culture than one which shows considerable variation and dispersal. Such a
   hypothesis will call for testing, and this in turn will lead to ramifying investiga-
   tions which carry the expectation of further understanding of the culture and
   of culture in general: are there any inferable reasons why this particular type
   should vary so; are there outside sources which could account for it, or are
   local origins to be hypothesized; does this type vary more than others, and if
   so in what ways and why; is the range of variation equal on both sides of the
  central tendency or is there skewing; is similar variation found in other types,
  and if so, in what types and what might be the relation between them; is the
  degree of homogeneity, i.e., integration, due to the length of its existence within
  the culture, to its intrinsic nature which permits or demands that particular
 120


 degree, or to what? These and other questions can be profitably investigated, but
 only after an ideal or abstract type has been established.
      On the other hand, the concept of type as a group of actual objects also has
 its uses. In not a few instances it will be impossible to establish any ideal ab-
 straction: the variability of the phenomena may be too great and too general
 to permit of being represented by a single set of elements and associations. This
 in itself might be culturally significant, and the only way of making use of the
 data is to describe the artifacts themselves. The success of Southwestern pottery
 study, is ample proof of the practicality and applicability of such types, based
 as the study is upon the concept of type as a group of objects.
     The concept archetype has been evolved in order to provide a convenient
 term for the handling of inferences as to culture ideas. The term pattern has not
 been used because, in the first place, it is too useful a word to be restricted and,
 in the second, the limitation of its meaning to mental constructs would require
 tedious and rather unconvincing argument in the face of other more inclusive
 definitions such as Kluckhohn’s (1941). In the present conceptual scheme,
 observable patterns, as for example the patterns stepped out by the feet of
 dancing men, the patterns of painted design found on pottery vessels, the
 regularities of city plan, the consistent avoidance of a mother-in-law, are con-
 sidered to be results of behavior and therefore the empirical data of culture
 studies.{ Patterns in this sense are not behavior, nor are they culture traits. They
 are the results of behavior which has been performed by human agents under
_the influence of ideas (culture traits). Thus they are overt, behavioral, action
patterns. The covert, ideal, and idea patterns of which Kluckhohn wrote (1941,
 pp. 114ff) are not included. It seems best, therefore, not to make further modi-
 fications of the concept of pattern but to offer another term which will cover
 the so-called covert segment of the broader concept. Webster’s dictionary defines
 archetype as

 The original pattern or model of a work, or the model from which a thing is made
 or formed. . . . Metaph. In Platonism, one of the pure ideas or realities of which
 existent things are imitations.

 Under the heading of prototype, the dictionary further defines archetype as
 “. . an original, often ideal, pattern or model.” The word has been chosen in
 preference to prototype because the latter is the more common word and is
 already in general use for a number of valuable concepts, and because in
archetype \there is conveyed an implication of mental constructs, which is con-
 genial to its use in the present conceptual scheme.
     The concept configuration, used in connection with the archeclass compart-
 ment, has been adapted from Kluckhohn (1941, pp. 114, 124). Here there is no
 need for modification, as in the case of archetype, because Kluckhohn’s concept
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               121

  is stated to be concerned with so-called covert or mental constructs and to have
  no overt segment. He says:
 —_

‘(Configuration |‘looks to an inner coherence in terms of the large structuralizing
 ke.          which prevail in the covert culture. Patterns are forms; configurations
   are, so to speak, interrglationships between forms. (1941, p. 126)

   Thus if an idea, conscious or unconscious, be inferred to structure several types
   or classes of culture objectifications, that idea may rightly be designated as a
   configuration. If a single idea, simple or complex in nature, appears to be one
   of the principles underlying, say, the decoration of pottery, the performance
   of religious rites, the construction of dwelling units, it may be termed a con-
   figuration. In the final chapter of the present study, an example of just such
   a configuration will be given.
        In summing up this explanation of Table 1, we may examine the relationships
   first between the vertical compartments and then between the horizontal ones.
   The concepts of form, type, and class may be explained by adapting an example
   presented by C. C. Zimmerman (1938, pp. 75-78). In describing a certain com-
   munity, he says: “Littleville is parasitic, good natured, negroid, rural and
   urbanistic.” These adjectives are the descriptive units which together comprise
   the “form” of Littleville in so far as Zimmerman is presently concerned. They
   constitute the basic, observational data from which both the type and class
   will eventually be derived. According to the present scheme, a type is a primary
   grouping which brings together certain individual forms which have specified
   descriptive attributes in common, exactly which depending upon the needs or
   whims of the investigator. Thus, Littleville might be included with other
   hamlets within a type whose sole criterion is a parasitic nature; or the type
   might include all hamlets which are parasitic and good natured; or it might
   include all towns that are parasitic, good natured, have a population of exactly
   503 souls, and contain a water tower painted green. In other words, a |type} may
   be characterized by specific similarities of any number, degree of “detail, or
  intrinsic character.
        The concept class designates a secondary grouping. It consists of types which
   manifest ‘specified similarities in some, but not all, of their type characteristics.
- Thus let us say that Littleville belongs in a type which is parasitic and good
   natured, that Bigville belongs in one which is parasitic and ill natured, and that
   Mediumville belongs in one which is good natured and has green water-towers.
   When it comes to classifying these types, we may class Littleville and its co-
  members with Bigville and its co-members on the basis of their parasitic charac-
   ter; or we may class the Littleville type with the Mediumville type on the
   basis of their good nature. In both instances, there has been a grouping of groups,
  a classifying or classing of types, not of individual hamlets. It is not the number,
  122


   the nature, or the detail of the specified criteria that distinguishes a type from a
   class in the present scheme, but rather it is the difference between a primary
   and a secondary grouping. It is perfectly possible for identically the same
   criteria at one time to designate a type and at another to designate a class. Type
   and class are concepts of different relative, not absolute, magnitude based upon
   the same range of data, and this holds true whether we are dealing with
   empirical, cultural, or culture categories.
       We may now examine the relationships between the horizontal compart-
   ments of the above tabulation, between the empirical, cultural, and culture
   categories. Although all three are creations of the archeologist, it is important to
   note that they pertain to different realms of phenomena, that they are established
   by different means, and that, unless the archeologist is aware of these differences,
   he is apt to go astray when it comes to drawing conclusions from his data. The
__ differences to be noted are those that obtain between (a) the empirical categories
   and (b) the cultural and culture categories: (1) the former relate to the world
   of the archeologist; the latter relate to the world of bygone people; (2) the
   former are based on chemico-physical attributes and their affinities; the latter are
   based upon criteria pertaining to cultural or culture attributes, such as tech-
   niques of manufacture, use, function, meaning, and culture idea; and (3) from
   the archeologist’s standpoint, the former are the only ones having wholly observa-
   ble criteria and thus the only empirical ones; cultural and culture categories,
   although they may be partially or wholly based on observable data, are estab-
   lished by means of interpretation and hypothesis and are thus inferential. Thus
   when investigations lead into the latter realms, they advance by inference
   from the empirical, and the results are to be viewed as hypotheses to be tested.
   For the archeologist, the empirical or purely observational has only a mediate
   function, forming merely the basis, not the goal, of his studies. By definition,
   he is interested in cultural contexts or in culture itself, and the categories which
   obviously he should seek are those pertaining to those fields. Also, and for the
   same reasons, his interests lie, not in the phenomena of his own world, but in
   the world of the original makers, users, or possessors, individually or as groups.
   In other words, the pertinent question to be asked is, ‘“What may be inferred
__today from present evidence as to those things that were relevant, significant,
   meaningful to the bygone individuals and societies under investigation?”
        As long as these differences are fully realized by the archeologist, he is
   forewarned and forearmed and will be able to act accordingly. But if they are
   overlooked to the extent that he regards the empirical categories of his own
  making as if they were, axiomatically, the same as the cultural or culture cate-
  gories of a bygone people, he is making an assumption which may lead him into
  serious error. From the standpoint of theory and method, it is not permissible to
  transmute an empirical category into a cultural or culture category except as a
  working hypothesis explicitly stated or as a conclusion drawn from a reasoned
  TAYLOR                       A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               123

   argument. To do otherwise is to beg the cultural question. There is no auto-
__Imatic, axiomatic assurance that the forms, types, and classes established today /
   by the archeologist are coextensive with any separable entities that existed in||
 _ the minds or life ways of a bygone people. At best, the declaration of any such |
   correspondence is a matter for explicit hypothesis and testing, not implicit
   assumption. It constitutes one of the archeologist’s greatest problems, not one
   of his self-evident truths.
       This fact lies at the foundation of the theory of archeological typology pro-
   posed by the present study (in the following, only typology will be mentioned,
   although the same things could be said with regard to classification). For when
__an archeologist says that the presence of Type A at both Site 1 and Site 2
__indicates some sort of direct cultural relationship between them, he is really
 _ Saying one or both of two things: either (1) that actual specimens of Type A
 _had come from one site to the other by some means, however direct or devious,
__or (2) that the idea of Type A or how to make Type A had been transmitted
  _from one site to the other with the recipient proceeding to manufacture one or
     more examples. In either case, the archeologist is forced to assume that the idea
 _ behind Type A or the idea behind the technique which produced Type A was a
__consistent factor, conscious or unconscious, in the mind(s) of a bygone individual
 _or group. In order to be applicable to interpretations concerning cultural rela-
 _ tionships, the typological similarities which the archeologist recognizes must
     be proved, or assumed, to be based on an actual idea and on one consistent
   _enough to have produced, at a minimum, two similar specimens.
         Since such ideas are not among the archeologist’s empirical data, it further
     follows that the seeking for, and the demanding of, “objectivity” in archeologi-
     cal studies is only partially a valid point of issue. In fact, the concept of ob-
     jectivity should be clarified before we even discuss this point at all. It is some-
     times said that an individual is thinking “objectively” or that a certain group
    of phenomena is an “objective” category. And it is often implied that “objective”
     thinking is concerned with “objective” categories. Now this may be so, but is
    not necessarily so. According to the way one uses the terms, one can do a lot of
    objective thinking about highly non-objective categories, and vice versa. The
    crux of the matter lies in the difference between a procedure or method and the
    data to which this procedure is applied. It would perhaps be better if we reserved
    the terms objective and subjective to describe the nature of thinking and used
    some terms such as empirical and inferential to refer, respectively, to the
    observational and non-observational nature of the phenomena thought about.
    Thus it would be that one could think either subjectively or objectively about
    phenomena that were either empirical or inferential. To make these distinctions
   would help to keep our own thinking clear, and this is, after all, the purpose
    of this or any other conceptual scheme.
     Returning to the question of “objectivity” in archeological studies, it appears
124


in most instances that when the archeologists use this term they mean what I
am here calling “empirical.” This can be seen from the fact that they use it in
connection with the criteria basic to their typologies and hence in connection
with the nature of their data and not of their thinking. This being so, it may
be categorically stated that their insistence upon “objective” criteria for their
so-called culture classifications reflects a misconception as to the nature of
archeological analysis as applied to cultural studies. I have been at some pains
to show that empirical types and classes (and this applies especially to those that
are founded on chemico-physical attributes alone) are only mediary to cultural
studies. This is true for the plain and simple reason that, of themselves, they
have nothing to do with the cultural world of the people under investigation.
It is only by inference from them that the archeologist can reach the realms of
past actuality. He may transmute his empirical categories into cultural ones
if he is willing to make explicit hypotheses or to present his evidence and argue
his views. In fact, this is the only way which is open to him! But by this very
procedure he leaves the empirical and embarks upon the tide of inference.
    And so it is not for the archeologist to cry blindly for “objectivity.” Rather
let him realize that his empirical studies are but mediate and that, if he aspires
to historiography or anthropology, he is required to deal with the inferential
as much as with the empirical. But let him deal with all categories of data as
explicitly (objectively) as possible, eschewing the emotional and implicit (sub-
jective) approach. And above all, let him analyze whatever in fact he does do,
so that he may bring into the open the procedures and premises upon which
his results are based. Perhaps, if he accepts these admonitions, he will also
come to realize that empirical typologies based on chemico-physical specifica-
tions alone are not satisfactory for cultural studies because they fail to take
into account many data that are vital as foundations for the necessary inferences.
And perhaps he will come also to realize that we have returned to the point which
I have stressed from the start} criteria for the empirical designation of form,
type, and class include provenience, association, qualitative and quantitative
facts and relationships, etc., in addition to the chemico-physical specifications. eS

    After this glimpse into the theoretical aspects of archeological typology, it
might be profitable to examine hurriedly some of the typologies and classifica-
tions appearing in the literature of Americanist archeology.
    W. D. Strong says of his version of Thomas Wilson’s chipped-stone-point
classification that
For the purpose of describing and comparing types of chipped arrowpoints, spear
heads, and knives, a Classification based entirely upon form [read “shape”] rather
than assumed function has been employed. . . . These outlines [of shapes] are
entirely irrespective of size. (1935, p. 87)
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             125

  The obvious intent of this denial of “assumed function” in favor of shape is the
 _usual one of wishing to be “objective,” i.e., to deal with empirical rather than
  inferential attributes of the points. With this desire there can be no quarrel—
  as far as handling the specimens on an empirical level is concerned. But when
  later (pp. 279, 281, 282) Strong uses these types for the purpose of ascertaining
  cultural and temporal relationships between sites, he forfeits his purely empirical
position and, albeit implicitly, assumes that his groupings are coextensive with
 cultural groupings developed consciously or unconsciously by the bygone people
 _who made them.       __ :
       In other words, ‘he is taking for granted that those people saw the same
  shapes as he does and grouped them in the same way. Any conclusions which
  Strong might base upon the presence or absence of “parallel-sided stemmed”
  points would be vitiated if the former people were completely indifferent as to
  whether their points had parallel-sided or contracting stems or if it made no
  difference to them whether their points had stems at all. Furthermore, if the
  ancient people viewed “side notches” as functional equivalents of the indenta-
  tions produced by an “expanding stem,” and if they thus classed them together
  and made them interchangeably as a means of securing binding sinews, the
  separation of these two shapes because of “the niceties of descriptive orderliness”
  in a modern empirical classification would most probably warp the archeologist’s
  conclusions. On the other hand, if the people classed together all points which
  were developed from a triangular-shaped blank as against those developed from
  an oval blank, an empirical classification which separated side-notched points
  from those with expanding stems might be in accord with the cultural facts.
  The crucial aspects of the matter, of course, lie in data over and above mere
  physical shape. They lie in the interpretation of associations, in making infer-
  ences and interpretations, and in following an “‘if-then” method until the
  archeologist can satisfy himself (and eventually his colleagues also) that his
 answer fits best with other data and has the most chance of being correct. Mere
 “objectivity” is of little value by itself.
     As the facts actually stand, Strong himself cites documentary and archeologi-
 cal evidence to the effect that the significant functional difference between the
 various chipped points is size and not shape (pp. 260, 267). Yet in his mono-
 graph we find no following up of this lead, no analysis of the provenience and
 distribution of large and small points within the pre-Pawnee sites in Nebraska.
 In the face of an apparently significant cultural dichotomy, he has continued to
 manipulate a purely empirical classification as an entity discrete from other
 data. He has not analyzed the associations in which the points were found nor
 given cross-references between the descriptions of specimens and the account
 of their finding within the sites. In short, to summarize the issues brought up
 in the preceding paragraphs, a classification such as Strong’s permits comparisons
126


with specimens from other sites only on the basis of shape. If to the criterion of
shape were added other attributes and the empirical affinities, the classification
might expectably be more precise and valuable; but it would, of itself, be no
more applicable to cultural comparisons. It would still remain purely empirical.
     Indeed, there is other, possibly even more conclusive evidence to support this
contention. How can it be maintained that Strong’s classification represents the
cultural categories or culture ideas of the former inhabitants of Nebraska, when
the same classification has been used for central California (Gifford and
Schenck, 1926; Schenck, 1926; Schenck and Dawson, 1929), and the Columbia
River region of Oregon-Washington (Strong, Schenck, Steward, 1930), and
southern California (Wedel, 1941a), unless it is further argued that all these
groups were culturally identical with regard to chipped stone points? It is even
more obvious that such classifications are purely descriptive or empirical, when
a classification of stone work developed for a late pueblo in New Mexico
(Kidder, 1932a) is used to group specimens at Uaxactun, Guatemala (Ricket-
son and Ricketson, 1937), and specimens found in the La Plata district of
northern New Mexico and Colorado with dates ranging from Basket-Maker III
to Pueblo III (Morris, 1939). The classification of bone work, developed for
artifacts dating from around A.D. 1300 onward at Pecos (Kidder, 1932a), is
likewise used irrespective of time and location: Wedel uses it for his Kern Lake,
California, specimens (1941a), and Cressman finds it applicable to specimens
taken from Oregon caves minimally dated at 5000 years ago. The latter even
goes so far as to say that:
Kidder’s system of classification of bone awls (1932) is followed as far as possible,
not intimating that there is any connection between our area and Pecos, but because
his system has great utility and provides a convenient frame of reference. (1942, p. 63)

It is hardly to be thought that the archeologists themselves believe that one
classification of stone and one of bone reproduces the cultural groupings and
ideas of American aborigines ranging from the State of Washington to Guate-
mala and from 3000 B.C. to around A.D, 1800. Their use of the Pecos systems
is primarily for descriptive convenience and not for cultural elucidation. But
they sometimes make the mistake of employing the categories as if they were
actually cultural ones. Unless the archeologist is willing explicitly to assume,
or to argue, that his empirical types and classes are coextensive with the cate-
gories characteristic of a bygone culture, he is wrong to use them to draw
cultural conclusions.
    The same can be said of typology within the field of Southwestern ceramics.
In fact, if the difference between empirical types and cultural types had been
clearly envisioned, the great proliferation of pottery types, which has aroused so
much criticism, would have been seen in its proper light and the long-standing
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              127

argument between the “splitters” and the “lumpers,” recognized in print by
Brew (1946, p. 55), Judd (1940, p. 430), Kidder (1936b, pp. xxv, Xxvil, 626),
Martin and Rinaldo (1941, p. 655), and Reiter (1938, pp. 489, 490), would not
have been inflicted upon the literature and discussion of Southwestern arch-
eology. Both parties to this quarrel seem to be off the mark: the “splitters,”
proceeding from their Starting point of descriptive analysis, make the mistake of
assuming without demonstration that their empirical types represent cultural
types; the “lumpers,” viewing pottery primarily from a cultural angle, refuse
to believe that the minute differences recognized by the other faction have any
real cultural significance either as indicators of relationships between sites or as
separable entities within the aboriginal ceramic complexes. If it had been
realized by both sides that empirical categories are one thing and cultural
categories another, much needless misunderstanding would have been avoided.
The “splitters” would not have attempted, without discussion or explicit assump-
tion, to use their empirical types as cultural entities, and the “lumpers” would
have seen that the fine discriminations made by the other faction were potentially
basic to, but not identical with, the cultural discriminations in which they them-
selves were particularly interested. Both would have realized that the reconcilia-
tion of their differences lay, not in an agreement as to the degree of refinement
acceptable in descriptive analysis, but in the correlation to be inferred between
empirical and cultural types. Both would have seen that the support of either
position required field and laboratory research, not polemics or ex cathedra
pronouncements as to the number of pottery types acceptable or unacceptable
for the Southwestern area and fractions thereof.
    Arguments against a multiplicity of types, if by this is meant empirical or
descriptive types, will not hold water. In the first place, from the viewpoint of
archeological reporting, it is of the utmost importance to grant the archeologist |
freedom to recognize and record all those similarities and differences which,
within his experience and a cultural frame of reference, seem significant to him. —
The publication of his empirical descriptions, named for convenience of handling
and usually called types, serve to acquaint his colleagues of his findings, to elicit
from them the antithetic or corroborative information urgently required, and to
provide the general literature with comparative material with which to lend
depth and significance to other finds from other sites.
    For the archeologist to sit on his ceramic eggs with no attempt to bring them
forth into the light of day through publication is recognized as bad practice. If this
is true, then the only limits are those set by the potential cultural significance
of the descriptive minutiae. But who can determine these limits? The archeolo-
gist is never sure, nor will he ever be, just what detail may turn out to be of
importance to his own studies or to those of his associates. If the limits are un-
definable because, in all probability, there are no limits, then the archeologist
128


himself is the only possible judge of the extent and detail to which his descrip-
tions should break down the material. His particular judgments may be adversely
criticized by specific argument, but his right and duty to make as detailed
judgments as he sees fit cannot with justice be denied.
    Furthermore, the often intimated criticism that such atomizing typology
produces too many names and descriptions and “clogs” the literature will not
hold water either. Surely the critics do not mean to imply that they are able
now, and plan to be able in the future, to memorize and retain in the mind the
names and descriptions of even the generally accepted types within the South-
west. If this is not implied and they will admit the necessity of recourse to
published descriptions   for their comparative    studies, the addition   of more
names is of no import, providing only that the names and descriptions can be
systemized for easy reference as, for instance, in a key like the one developed in
the Handbook of Northern Arizona Pottery Wares (Colton and Hargrave, 1937).
Taxonomists of other disciplines make no such effort to keep in mind their
entire typology or to work from memory when comparing specimens. There is
no reason for Southwesternists to restrict the scope and refinement of their
descriptive typology merely for the sake of a primitively simple system which
might safely be retained in the mind. To do so would be to fly in the face of
scientific progress, which has consistently advanced by way of more detailed
analysis as the basis for more far-reaching synthesis.
    Also there have been depreciations of the practice of defining a pottery type
on the basis of a single potsherd. Strictly speaking, according to the system
proposed by the present study, this is indeed an impossibility because any single
manifestation is by definition a “form” and cannot be a “type.’’ However, two
sherds of the same form can and do constitute a type and, although I may be
mistaken here, such a two-sherd type would probably be subjected to the same
criticisms as have been directed at a single-sherd category. By way of example,
let us suppose that from some definitely pre-Spanish ruin in the Southwest an
archeologist has excavated two small sherds which exhibit a bright orange glaze
upon which flowers had been painted in blue. For the purposes of the example,
let us further suppose that it could not be conclusively demonstrated one way
or the other whether the two sherds originally belonged to the same or to different
vessels. Such unique and unprecedented specimens would surely warrant descrip-
tion, and when   they were discovered    to be significantly alike they would be
thrown together in a common account. What else would this be but an empirical
type? Whether or not the description was dignified with a name for the sake of
ease in reference is of no theoretical consequence. It is to be very much doubted
whether any archeologist would suppress the data concerning these two sherds,
and if he did so it would be a glaring example of malpractice. The description of
a single sherd thus constitutes an empirical form, and the description of two or
 TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             129

  more sherds with specified similarities comprises an empirical type. If this is an
  acceptable procedure in the case of unique sherds, it is also possible and ac-
  ceptable with sherds which display a lesser degree of unusualness. As before, the
  dividing line between the non-conformities which warrant type differentiation
  and those that do not is not “given.” It is safe to say that no one is qualified
  to lay down the law in this regard, and so each archeologist must be his own
  judge, letting both his conscience and his experience be his guide. If, at some
  later date, other data indicate that the archeologist was in error, then let his
  statements be revised and corrected. This is the way of any scientific discipline,
  and it is perfectly properly the way of archeology. (See below, Chapter 6, pp.
  157f)
       Up to this point I have been talking of empirical types. The correspondence
  between these and cultural or culture types is an additional matter which calls
  for further study, assumption, and argument. Types which have been established e
  on the basis of descriptive analysis are not, ipso facto, cultural types. Often they
  will be found to have no inferable cultural significance. Often they will have
  to be regrouped or subdivided in order to satisfy the cultural implications of the
  data. Differences which, from an empirical point of view, had been thought of
  no significance and which had not been used to separate types, might later be
  found to distinguish important cultural categories and would thus require more
  minute break-downs. The reverse might also be the case: several categories,
  which had been distinguished on empirical grounds, might be discovered to have
  identical cultural significance and thus to call for amalgamation into a single
  cultural type. These eventualities in no way adversely affect the validity of
  empirical types or complicate the cultural issue. All that is required is for the
  archeologist to be aware of the difference and use the categories with regard for
  their limitations and potentialities. In doing this, he should find a welcome free-
  dom of research procedure and a considerable clarification in his archeological
  thinking.
       This brings us to another point which has been the cause of some confusion
  among the archeologists. In a recent publication, J. O. Brew has made much
  of the fact that typologies (and classifications, to use the present terms) are
  arbitrary, that such systems are made by the student, and that types are not
  discovered but rather created and put in a system (1946, pp. 44-66). This
  appears to be a perfectly true statement as far as it goes. The archeologists,
  as well as students of other disciplines, can and do build their categories on
_ the basis of criteria of their own choosing, depending on the requirements of
  their current._problems. It is possible to type automobiles on the basis of the
  length of the scratches in their paint, to classify sand-tempered potsherds on the
  number of sand grains in each, or to group together all chipped stone points
  which have side notches. It would be possible, but the pertinent question is
 130


 “So what?” And the answer to this is, of course, “So that the results will be
 of help in pursuing the investigations in which I am currently engaged.” Now the
 alleged aim of archeological research is to obtain a knowledge of the culture of
 the people of some presently uninhabited site. Therefore it is wrong to say, as
   Brew does, that “No typological system is actually inherent in the material”
   (1946, p. 46). In cultural material, as it is found by the archeologist, there are
  inherent systems, namely, the ones developed by the people who made, used, or
  possessed that material. Brew says, ‘Systematic classifications are simplifications
  of and generalizations of the natural situation” (1946, p. 46), but a cultural
  situation is not a “natural” situation! Those bygone people imposed their own
  particular system upon nature and their own products, they had their own
  way of thinking about things, and it is their, and not our, system(s) which the
_ archeologist should attempt to discover. He should try to make his systematic
  creations (and his typologies are just that) conform to those of the former
  culture. How else can he hope to understand it? Inherent in cultural products is
 the systematics of the people who produced them, 2and Brew’s biological analogy
  has but led him astray. (See also McKern, 1939, p. 312)
       It is probably true that culture—the whole of culture, i.e., in the holistic
  sense defined in the preceding chapter—is a continuum and that any attempt
  to break it up into segments on a purely cultural basis is arbitrary. This fact
  accounts for some of the difficulties in applying the culture-area concept. But
  when the term is used in its partitive sense, meaning a culture or a socio-political
  grouping, where we are dealing with a well-defined segment possessing a charac-
  teristic culture, culture is not a continuum, except in time. Individual ideas,
  patterns, types are often adhered to consciously; and even to those that are
  unconscious, there is a more or less consistent adherence which produces recog-
  nizable aspects of the particular culture. Brew himself, while insisting upon the
  arbitrary character of typology, commends the Beals-Brainerd-Smith analysis
  of pottery decoration styles (1945) which is nothing more nor less than an
  attempt to arrive at an understanding of the decorative concepts of bygone
  potters. Their analysis is their own construction, but it aims to discover the
  ancient concepts inherent in the material. The extent to which they have been
  successful in this is the extent of their attainment, and I hasten to add that I
  heartily concur in Brew’s enthusiasm for their results. Therefore, while the
  distinction between what is called Plains Culture and what is called Eastern
 Woodland Culture may be purely arbitrary, the distinctions which do exist be-
 tween the designs on Hopi ceramics and those executed by Acoma potters,
 beween spiral-grooved Pecos axes and the three-quarter-grooved axes of Snake-
 town, between the moccasin patterns of various Plains tribes, are the results of
 ideas held by the Indians themselves and are inherent in the results of their
 culture-influenced behavior.
ene                       A STUDY OF ARCHEOLOGY                                131
    Following this line further, some light may be thrown on a problem which
seems to have vexed the archeological taxonomists for a considerable time. Many
of them have found difficulty in deciding just what attributes should be recog-
nized in making their types and classes. They have been uncertain as to the
degree of refinement which their analysis should encompass and have been look-
ing for some mechanical means of determination. They have been worried about
the proliferation of recognized ceramic attributes as opposed to the paucity of
those within some category such as chipped stone points or bone “awls” (e.g.,
McKern, 1939, pp. 306f). But I believe that there would have been much less
of this uncertainty if the archeologists had viewed their material in some such
light as that proposed in the present study, if they had viewed culture traits as
ideas and not as material objects, if they had envisioned cultural behavior as
mediate between ideas and material objects, in short if they had recognized the
difference between their own empirical, descriptive groupings and the cultural
and culture categories pertinent to the peoples they were studying.
    For example, let us take the attribute of hardness so common in the pottery
typologies and classifications in both the Southwest and Midwest. Here we
have a physical property, an empirical specification which is useful in describing
the objects. But culturally speaking what is it? Is the archeologist willing to
contend that the Indians recognized hardness or had an idea as to the appro-
priate hardness of their pottery in terms of the modern mineralogical scale? If
he is unwilling so to argue, then hardness is an empirical specification only and
does not belong in cultural and culture typologies. Even if the archeologist
argues that hardness is the result of some technique of manufacture which was
indeed recognized by the Indians, hardness itself is not cultural but only a
sign of some cultural attribute, an indication of the existence of a certain
technique. Thus, while hardness remains empirically valid, the really significant
attribute from any cultural point of view is the technique of manufacture, say
the firing temperature or the paste composition, which were the products of
consistent ideas, i.e., culture traits.
     From this, a test may be established for the inclusion or exclusion of any
specified attribute. In his empirical descriptions, the archeologist is free to
include any specification that he wishes. In his cultural categorizations, he may |
include any specification which he is willing to assume is the material embodi-
ment of a consistent idea in the mind(s) of the former maker, user, or possessor.
Such a test permits great freedom to the archeologist but, at the same time,
makes him explicitly responsible for the cultural implications of the systematics
which he uses. If he is willing to assume that the side notches which he has
empirically described under a classification such as Strong’s were also recognized
by the Indians, then he is free to incorporate the attribute of side notches in
any cultural classification he might create and to make use of them in cross-
132


culture comparisons. The testing of his working hypothesis will be his responsi-
bility or that of his critics, and it will depend upon the marshalling of evidence
pro or con. In other words, so long as the archeologist is willing to make an
explicit assumption and to look upon it as a working hypothesis, he is free
to make his cultural and culture groupings in whatever manner he sees fit.

     This brings us to the final point in this discussion. The theoretical problems
of the so-called culture classifications of the Southwest and Midwest have
 received considerable attention. The similarity of these systems to the Linnaean
 classification of biology has been attacked on a number of occasions (e.g.,
 Brew, 1946, pp. 44-66; Steward, 1941) and not without some justice, although
I shall have something to say about this later. However, two of the most basic
points of misconception seem to have escaped the critics, with the result that
their arguments are somewhat beside the point.
     The first of these is the use of presence-and-absence “trait” lists as the
foundation of classification. This usage is based on the assumption that the
important factor about archeological discoveries is their presence or absence
within a given site. And although the fact will probably be vehemently denied
by the taxonomists, this assumption is accompanied by its corollary, namely,
that the location, association, quantitative and qualitative relation to the cul-
tural and natural environment is of no, or at least of secondary, importance.
But actually, and contrary to McKern’s statement (1940, p. 19), a list showing
the presence and absence of “‘traits” does not represent the former inhabitants
of a site, at least in any cultural sense; nor do cultures, archeological or other-
wise, consist of lists of typological tags as Griffin implies (1935). Surely there
is more to “a culture” than this.
     But the taxonomists, in their preoccupation with such lists, have gone so
far as to modify an anthropological concept of long and respected standing and
to involve themselves thereby in not a little confusion. I refer to their use of
the term culture complex or, as it sometimes is written, trait complex. In the
bulk of anthropological literature this concept is defined, as Linton put it
 (1936b, p. 397), as “a larger functional unit,” the traits within which “are all
more or less interrelated and interdependent from the point of view of both
function and use.” But the taxonomists applying the Midwestern system have
adopted the term in the sense of a mere assemblage or congeries of “traits” or
descriptive items which they have seen fit to isolate, name, and list. McKern
says:
If substantially the same traits are found to occur repeatedly at site after site, one
can be quite sure that this persistently grouped lot of traits is characteristic of a
single culture. Such a repeatedly recurring series of traits is called a culture complex.
(1940, p. 19)
 TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                133

  Earlier he had said:
  The more simple and direct method is that of analyzing materials from a site or
  community as such, comparing the list of traits so determined with similarly determined
  trait complexes from other sites or communities, and classifying on a basis of
  similarity or dissimilarity to establish foci. (1938, p. 370, italics mine)

 Throughout his work he seems to use complex in this, rather than in the in-
 tegrative, sense. Cole and Deuel, on the other hand, in their Rediscovering
 Illinois use it sometimes to signify a mere assemblage (1937, pp. 34; 207, fn 4)
 and sometimes as it was defined by Linton (1937, pp. 36-39, 209). Ritchie
 makes the same shift (1940b, p. 100; 1944, pp. 52, 325). Fairbanks (1941,
 p. 12) uses complex and activity, following Linton, and Griffin (1943, pp. 328,
 330) follows McKern.
     With regard to ethnographical data, Opler has pointed out the dangers of
 dependence upon trait lists. Specifically, he says:
_ The difficulty in placing these traits and deciding whether or not they belong on
  our list involves a critique of a statistical approach to anthropological data which
 assumes that a trait in one culture is the counterpart or equivalent of a formally
 _similar or comparable trait in another culture. (1935, p. 705)

 The same warnings apply to archeological materials and even more so, because
 the qualifications which Kluckhohn has apparently rightfully made pertain
 much less to archeology than to ethnology. He says:
   . . what he [Opler] seems to me to demonstrate is that formal similarity can some-
 times mislead us. So far as I am aware no one has given an inductive demonstration
 that in the greater number of cases (or in any number sufficient to disturb statistical
 results) highly specific similarities (within a not too great geographical area) do not
 indicate some sort of historical connection past or present, direct or indirect. Granted
 freely that the same trait is by no means always the same behavior, it does not
 follow that detailed parallelisms are without historical significance. (1939, pp. 351-
 352)
 In the first place, the archeological classifications which are based on “formal
 similarities” use, for the most part, very simple and not “highly specific” simi-
 larities. An ax is an ax, and an awl an awl. Even within the more elaborate
 complexes such as ceramics, the whole is broken down to such a degree that the
 items which are compared on a one-to-one basis are, of themselves, very simple.
 Secondly, at least within the Midwestern system, the comparisons are often
 made irrespective of time and space, so that Kluckhohn’s strictures about “a
 not too great geographical area” do not hold. Finally, Kluckhohn is talking of
 the value of formal similarities for comparative purposes, for the connections
 and cross-culture relationships which they imply. He is not talking from the
 standpoint of constructing a cultural context. To be sure, a list of typological
134


tags will give some idea as to the nature of the culture, but is “some idea” what
the archeologist is looking for? Is it enough to take the place of the fuller
contexts available to the ethnologist and historian? Can the archeologist depend
on his comparative studies if they are based on no more than “some idea’’?
I think not, and an example will show why.
     Let us take the textile industries as reported from two cave sites: Lovelock
Cave, central Nevada (Loud and Harrington, 1929), and Frightful Cave, central
Coahuila, Mexico, as excavated by the U. S. National Museum’s 1940-41
Coahuila Expedition.1°’ Tabulating these industries on a presence-and-absence
basis, we find the following results (Table 2). Looking at the two industries as
wholes, we certainly see a “highly specific” similarity. It is hardly to be doubted
that any of the archeological taxonomists would hesitate to equate the textile
industries of the two sites or, if other industries showed a like similarity, would
fail to classify the sites together.
     When quantitative information is added, the results are as shown in Table 3.
The picture has changed radically. The quantitative data indicate a decided
 difference rather than a similarity between the sites. The frequency order of
the categories is different, pointing to a different orientation of cultural needs.
 The frequency order within the categories (in five out of six where it exists)
 shows a reversal as between the two sites. The differential number of ‘“‘miscel-
laneous artifacts,” absolutely and relative to the total textile category, points to
 a haphazard versatility among the Coahuila cave people which was not char-
 acteristic of the inhabitants of Lovelock, and it also marks a definite cleavage
 between the two sites. These and many other implications can be derived even
 from the few data and slight manipulation presented here. For instance, it is
 much more significant that wicker basketry is present in Lovelock Cave and is
 the dominant type while it is absent in the Mexican site, than that it is merely
 present in one and absent in the other. A presence-and-absence table would
 tend to smooth the line of what is really a sharp peak in the graph of basketry
 difference. A presence-and-absence table would show absolutely no variation in
 the knot complex, while in actual fact the variation is noteworthy, both within
 the category and within the textile industry as a whole. The vast quantitative
 difference in the sandal category provides another lead for hypothesis and
 investigation, Can it be accounted for by the former presence and subsequent
 decay of leather footgear at Lovelock? The finding of a few leather moccasins
 suggest such a possibility. Does the disparity indicate considerable travel, even
  nomadism, over the jagged limestone rocks of Coahuila and a more or less
  sedentary existence near the tule marshes of the Nevada lake? What other
  evidence can be adduced to the support or contradiction of these hypotheses?
  Or assuming their correctness for the moment, what light do they shed on
  other facts of the respective cultures?
TAYLOR                                   A STUDY      OF ARCHEOLOGY                                         135




                                                      TABLE       2
                                                                                LovELock       FRIGHTFUL

          Basketry
            Wl CRETE          SPAR    arenas  COA EA Cog                               x            —
            SONe Rn, Met            At! ee          eee       ae                       x             Xx
               BENE SUECH Seer to hk ak cron Bee «                                     x               x
            {NAL OCSLG HRS weyRtn arn ee CeRe ORE ex ina cP bhai                       x               x
            DIAILOG cree eich sare 8 ays AM ee           a oc                      —                   aR

         Matting
              CWLOEG      tee      Poet         red    ae    ay       Nace ee       x               x
              Dlaitede    6)        as    eh    ee           eS           iy                        x

         Netting
                  aIrere Metspaycht Mhy's, ONE oe
             [eGTO}                               PacE 2                            x               x
             cn GELESS pene tee ee MRARETE Gas ee gus ee                           —                Xe

         Knots
           Sheet Dendua mts      ote ee ne    ne he et                             x                x
           GVETHANC i Se     eRe se oe a eee See toe nee                           x                x
           PTAUNVE wok save eo ree Pere Peeies bere ayers eg c -                   x                x
             Fe       eo eit ck NR Sk ee   Cee    a                                a                x
             wentatiem ees cae UMP ae SLES de areas Ss                             x                x

         Cloth
           TOALNCESS eee ce RR PON        Se coon COTES os                         x               —
           HORE) pape OR COME, Sete SEIS eC       ED, era                          x                x
           tw]CL Moeenet ei Cea te Gi          ieaeas er Te Ge                    —                 x

         BraiGeeaee      Shs     Renee          TE are” NIRS. o ORR                ie               x

         Sandals
           EWITCC        EIN       etek. + tadetts ache Gita          krRes        x               —
             TINO        ne     ee Pee    een   en Kee       ik GyeWe             —                 x

         (ADrOlion     ett cone     rt nee et Moore kc omen       oe oe    RS      x                x

                 otal stemsiirom) DOthsIteS.                       obs
                                                            ee weeds              21
                 Items/cammon to both sites 7.77.5. <0.                           13 or 62%
                 Lovelock items common to both sites.....                         13 out of 16 or 81%
                 Frightful items common to both sites.....                        13 out of 18 or 72%
136


                                                          TABLE 3
                                                                                           FREQUENCY
                                                                                             ORDER
                                              LovELock               FRIGHTFUL              WITHIN
                                                                                           CATEGORY

      Basketry
        MVICKED Mee tsaie eee                  1115                     0
        Coiled)! sta        eet                 309                   112
          SPS tic hiaen neta                   typical               rare                     same (?)
        twined eset          meee               104                    10
        plaited 4a. eee       ee    ee            0                     6

                                                          1528 (1)              128 (4)
      Matting
        ‘twined taper           are rae        1418                    24
        plaited 2.2./-cya serenity a:              0                   76                     reversed
                                                          1418 (2)              100 (5)
      Netting
        knotted:.a.ee eee                      1016                    10
        knotless: cee ee                           0                   70                     reversed

                                                          1016 (3)                80 (6)
      Knots
        sheetbend= seen
                      soe er                     185 (1)                5 (5)
        OMAVGING. oocccocsce                      83 (2)              294 (2)
        Prana                                     22 (3)               17 (4)                 reversed
        Slipias ae ae oe ee ee                    14 (4)               28 (3)
        Scared eps ee:                             4 (5)              379 (1)
                                                           308 (4)               723 (3)
      Cloth
        feather,     Sanat vga:                  203                    0
        hALb eae Aaa nse sia oro                  40                   12                     reversed
        twihed asncsnees Seen:                     0                   15

                                                           243 (5)                27 (7)
      Braid soporte
                 eee ee                          142                   26                     (none)

                                                           142 (6)                26 (8)
      Sandals
        TWIN                 tc eee               87                    ()
        plaited PRG    St   yore Cn te   an        0                  912                     reversed


                                                            87 (7)               912 (2)
      Misc.   artifacts      (exclusive
        Ol cordage) mewacerane                                       3540                     (none)
                                                            64 (8)              3540 (1)
      IADTONS i       tinct crete                     9                     S                 (none)

                                                             9 (9)                 5 (9)
              TOTAL nrayerenteee               4815                  5541
TAYLOR                        A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  137

    Without the weighting and balance given by, among other things, the
quantitative data, the cultural context is the loser. But is not the comparative
study also? It has been shown above that even the not inconsiderable presence-
and-absence similarities to be found in a broad complex such as the textile
industry can be very misleading as the basis for cross-culture comparisons and
taxonomy.
     Before proceeding, it should be emphatically stated that the example given
above is not a rigged case. It was discovered in the course of routine compara-
tive study in connection with the writing of an archeological report. The only
crucial assumption that has been made is that there was not too much difference
in the efficiency of the two excavations. Granting a representative sample from
each cave and a conscientious effort to save and report the evidence of human
handiwork, there is no bar to full and detailed comparisons. The first of these
provisions is, of course, a limiting one with respect to some archeological
material. Where there is no assurance that the complete site has been excavated
or a representative sample secured, as for example in much of the data used
by Griffin for his study of the Fort Ancient Aspect (1943), quantitative infor-
mation is unreliable and would be misleading to use without qualification. But
such extenuating circumstances are not the rule, fortunately, and most of the
so-called culture classifications have been built on the basis of sites recently
excavated where, if not the actuality, at least the possibility of a representative
sample was present. When this is the case and when the archeologist fails to
give his comparisons the depth afforded by quantification, he is in grave danger
of error. And even if his presence-and-absence tabulations are eventually shown
to depict actual conditions, the demonstration of this fact must rest on just such
added information as provided by quantification, association, provenience, etc.
The tabulations themselves are but one part of the evidence, and of doubtful
reliability at that!
    Thus it is that when Steward criticizes Colton’s taxonomic attempts by
attacking the smallness of percentage differences between the various groupings
(1941), he is hitting at a secondary phenomenon. Instead of analyzing the
value of the lists themselves, he seems content to accept them. In fact, he says:
Were percentage tables [based on presence-and-absence lists] given for all classifications,
the reader could ignore the formal classification and observe for himself the true
relationships. (1941, p. 367)1°
The reader might be able so to observe, but I doubt it. The real weakness lies,
not in obfuscating the percentages, but in the source from which the percentages
were derived.
    Likewise, the dichotomy which Phillips sets up between “the stratigraphic
and the analytic (McKern) methods” seems to hit beside the point. He says:
138


[the faults of Webb’s Pickwick Basin report] lie almost wholly in the domain         of
interpretation and are the result of mixing the stratigraphic and the analytic (McKern)
methods. In spite of all that has been said to the contrary, I believe that the two
methods cannot be harmonized, one must give way before the other. . . . For once
stratigraphy speaks so plainly it must be heard. No classifier could be happy in the
contemplation of a mere focus which comprehends everything from a culture lacking
even flint to one dominated by pottery. This is the focus to end all foci. Yet in all
conscience what else could the authors do? The stratigraphy plainly offered no
opportunity for a break-down that could be expressed by trait lists. This is the
important point. Your archaeologist unhampered by a classificatory bias, would find
no trouble at all in breaking the series down into sequent periods, each marked by
the appearance of a new type of material. Persistence of the older types would not
bother him at all. (1942, pp. 197, 198)

He seems unable to get away from the idea of “trait” lists. Why is it necessary
even to have “a new type of material” before a series can be broken down?
Why would it not be possible, and culturally significant, to recognize a break
when the quantitative or qualitative relationships change? The cultura! roster
could remain exactly the same so far as presence-and-absence was concerned,
but would it not be significant if, for example, the ratio of harpoons to fishhooks
went from 75:25 in the lowest deposits to 25:75 in the upper levels? Would
not that point at which it passed the 50:50 mark represent a possible point
of division? What about a case wherein the quality of twined-woven sandals
obviously improved from bottom to top within an archeological deposit? If the
Midwestern taxonomists cry that this is not enough, that we are probably
dealing with the evolution of a technique within a single human group, then
let them not maintain that they deal only with “cultural factors.” It is only
by the assumption of a socio-political or “tribal” unit that this example can
fail to call forth a division. Formally, the end-points are considerably different
and should be so classified, if ‘cultural’ factors alone weigh in the balance.
According to the Southwestern system, if only it would recognize qualitative
data, there would be no difficulty in separating the two end-points, because the
space-time factor is not denied. The crux of this particular matter would, of
course, be whether further evidence or the archeologist’s explicit judgment
seemed to warrant the break-down. Potentially and ideally it should be possible,
but it is not so under the rigid tenets of a presence-and-absence system.
    Therefore it does not seem probable that there is any unresolved conflict
between the stratigraphic and the taxonomic methods. The trouble lies in the
manner in which these tools are used by the archeologists. It is likely that much
of the fault found, here and in other places, with the Gladwin-Colton and
McKern systems would be eliminated if quantitative, qualitative, and other
relational data were applied throughout the analytical procedure. In this fashion,
cultural rosters made up of cultural and culture forms, types, classes, could be
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              139

utilized for constructional and comparative purposes, and sequent groups of
material could be assigned to different classificatory units, even though the
actual cultural roster proved to be identical from bottom to top.
    All this business of the objectivity of “trait” lists, and the adding and
percentaging of “traits,” is a fine instance of what Professor Sapir used to call
“spurious accuracy.” He made the point that because we feel we “must be
accurate,” we often limit ourselves in our analyses to those phenomena which
are amenable to finite accuracy. This leads to an overemphasis of certain aspects
and the neglect of others. The taxonomists are as aware as anyone that all
culturally important data do not lie in the chemico-physical properties of the
material nor in the mere presence or absence of objects at archeological sites.
Yet because such things as quality, ratio, association do not readily lend them-
selves to tabular presentation and simple statements, they have been neglected,
even shunned. The result is a warped picture of the culture and the cross-
cultural relationships.
    Furthermore, even the “trait” lists which have been established are suspect
from the viewpoint of “objectivity.” At the risk of seeming overly to dwell
on one archeologist, I shall again turn to Griffin for illustrative material because
his monumental work The Fort Ancient Aspect (1943) contains within its ample
pages not only a classic example of the taxonomic method but also much
detailed exposition to which specific reference can be simply made. He often
speaks of the “objectivity” of the method which he employs (e.g., pp. 3, 303,
334, 335, 340). But, making the distinction between objective-subjective on the
one hand and empirical-inferential on the other (see p. 123 above), we find that
his method does not insure either objectivity or empiricism. To be sure, there
is much which is of these orders, but also there is much which is no more
objective or empirical than is to be found in the works of others following other
methods. Intrinsically and of itself, the taxonomic method is no more objective
nor based upon more empirical data than non-taxonomic methods.
    In the table of non-pottery “traits” given following page 376, Griffin lists
Plain bone beads, long and Plain bone beads, short. Empirically, it probably
is a fact that there are some bone beads which are longer than others, but the
decision as to the dividing line between what are to be designated as long and
what as short is definitely not empirical. It is a matter of Griffin’s judgment
with regard to the significance of bead length within the cultural setting. The
same can be said for his decision to make two categories instead of many.
And finally, it has been his judgment which has brought about a subdividing
of the bone-bead category and not of such categories as bone tubes, stemmed
stone points, antler handles, etc. He has seen fit to give bone beads double
weighting in his tabular lists, and this could have been done only on the basis
of an inference as to the significance of the length of bone beads and the
insignificance of length within other categories. As for his objectivity in so
140


dividing the beads, one is in the dark because there is nothing in the text which
will indicate the grounds on which he determined the significance of bead length
or what actual lengths are designated as long or short. For this reason the
division must be considered not only inferential but subjective. This lack of
observational and explicit criteria makes it impossible for the reader to repro-
duce Griffin’s results or to know on what basis they were achieved.
    The same applies to the creation of others of his categories. He has distin-
guished between side or corner notched knives, side notched points, and corner
notched points, in other words, between “‘points” and “knives” which display
the same notching. Again the segregation is inferential and subjective. Thus,
no matter how objective are the procedures applied to these categories, the
results will still retain a strong subjective and inferential element. Basically,
they will still be founded upon what the archeologist thought was important
and significant. This point seems to have escaped Griffin because he says that
he has used arbitrary divisions based on material of manufacture in order to
“eliminate the use of subjective groupings based upon such terms as ‘art’ and
‘ceremonial’” (p. 3). At the same time he tabulates specimens under such
headings as bone hair-spreader, whetstones, shell knives and scrapers, musical
rasp, etc., which beg no less interpretative questions than the terms art and
ceremonial.
    It is not conducive to a strong belief in the “objectivity” of his method,
when we analyze some of his judgments upon which we can make a check after
a fashion. For example, in Table XIV he lists the bell-shaped pestle from seven
of the possible nineteen Fort Ancient sites, and in the text he says that
“although the evidence is not clear, it seems likely that the Fort Ancient
peoples may have had the bell-shaped pestle” (p. 231) and that ‘‘in spite of
the fact that the bell-shaped pestle is listed as an aspect trait, its place in this
culture is uncertain” (p. 197). In other words, seven out of a possible nineteen
site-records is not enough to establish bell-shaped pestles within the aspect. On
the other hand he lists stone hoes from eight of the nineteen sites and says:
The Iroquois used the wooden digging stick or more rarely an antler hoe instead
of the stone hoe or shell hoe, as the Fort Ancient people did [sic]. (p. 231)
Here the stone hoe is credited with being a Fort Ancient implement on the basis
of eight occurrences, while there was evidently considerable doubt as to the
bell-shaped pestle on the basis of seven. I wish to emphasize that I am not
holding in suspicion Griffin’s judgments on these topics. What I am doing is
trying to show that they are in fact judgments and that, therefore, his method
is not the “objective” one he claims. Of itself, his method does not make his
results any more objective or empirical (and it probably does not make it any
less so). The mere putting of archeological data into lists instead of paragraphs
does not make it more “objective,” nor is this accomplished by the operations
of adding, percentaging, or other mathematical manipulation.
TAYLOR                       A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 141

    The second point I wish to make, and one which is possibly even more basic
than the last, is that the so-called culture classifications of the Southwest and
Midwest are classifications neither of separable cultural entities nor of archeo-
logical materials in any cultural sense. Except by the odd chance of coincidence,
there can be no connection between the groupings which result from taxonomic
manipulations according to these systems and the aboriginal “tribal” or cultural
groupings. Although the general tenor of explanatory statements (e.g., Colton,
1939, pp. 6-16; McKern, 1939) has been to the effect that, actually or poten-
tially, the taxonomic units are equivalent to pre-existing socio-political or cul-
tural units, there is no justification to be found for such a contention within
the systems themselves. This is due to one fact: the taxonomic units, entirely
or with but rare exception, are constructed from empirical types and classes,
not cultural or culture ones. The attributes of quantity and quality, of
provenience and association, and of their respective affinities have not been
utilized in creating categories. Segregation has been accomplished on the basis
of empirical attributes of a very restricted range and of significance more to
the archeologist than to the bygone peoples. For example, Cole and Deuel say:
To test this conviction [that both Woodland and Mississippi Patterns occur in Fulton
County, Illinois], also to obtain a purely objective view [sic] of all materials recorded,
the larger cultural complexes, such as pottery and projectile points, were spread out
and separated into types without regard to place of occurrence or association with
other objects. (1937, p. 39, italics mine)
And, although it was apparently not of his own doing, Griffin’s analysis of
Webb’s Norris Basin pottery “was conducted without any knowledge of the
other material found at the sites.”’ (Griffin, 1938, p. 253)
     How can it be expected that types, created with so little regard for cultural
data, will, when classified, yield a picture of the cultural relationships that once
existed? The mere fact that some types come from a single site or geographic
locality is, of itself, no proof that they should be grouped together culturally.
Camp sites and cave sites and other stopping places of more or less transient
peoples can conceivably preserve within a very limited space the products of
not a few separate cultural and political entities. Distinct strata, with or without
interspersed sterile layers, will help the archeologist to discriminate in many
cases, but what is to help him if there are no such aids and the deposits are
found to be without a break from top to bottom? How can he be sure as to just
what cultural entities he is dealing with, unless he analyzes the provenience and
associations of his material for consistent and significant cohesions and separa-
tions? At some sites, such as small pueblos or individual pithouses, cohesion is
quite apparent; but at a great many, as for instance the camp sites and shell
heaps upon which much of the Midwestern classification has been built, there
is the strong possibility that contiguity is due to historical accident rather than
cultural relationship. To have reasonable assurance of the latter there is required
142


more than formal similarity coupled with gross spatial propinquity. These may
be profitable leads, but they cannot be expected to tell the whole story either
from the point of view of cultural comparisons or cultural contexts.
     In short, what the taxonomists are doing, for the most part at least, is
grouping their material on the basis of purely chemico-physical similarities and
saying that the resulting categories represent “cultural divisions,” i.e., separable
cultural entities which actually existed as such in past times. The Gladwin-
Colton system avowedly uses the added criterion of space-time and, in Colton’s
case at least, identifies one of its categorical levels with former tribes (Colton,
1939, pp. 12, 71; 1942, p. 39). The McKern system professes to use only cultural
criteria, but its advocates obviously believe that its categories are potentially
representative of formerly existing units, cultural, linguistic, “tribal,” ethno-
geographic, etc. (Griffin, 1937a, 1937b, 1943, pp. 337-338, 1945a; McKern,
1943, pp. 314-315; 1944, pp. 445-446). Here I believe the Southwestern system
has the greater possibility of attaining its goal, because the added factor of
space-time reduces the likelihood of identifying chance aggregates as cultural
or socio-political entities. Nevertheless, what the archeologists are really doing
is putting together what seems to them to be similar in appearance, instead of
combining what they have explicitly inferred was culturally cohesive in those
bygone days from which their material derives.

    In closing this chapter, I wish to bring up the often repeated criticisms of
the similarities between Americanist taxonomies and the Linnaean classification
of biology. Granting that the archeologists have for the most part applied their
systems too rigidly and apparently often without a full awareness of the impli-
cations of their procedures, still it seems to me that a great deal of the criticism
which I have heard and read has been beside the point and shows an almost
equal inflexibility and a comparable misunderstanding.
    For example, Brew has elaborated at some length the fact that cultural
phenomena do not reproduce sexually and, therefore, are not susceptible of a
genetic or biological classification in any literal sense (1946, pp. 46-57; see also
Steward 1941, p. 366). To add weight to this attack, he makes much of the fact
that, even in biology, the species concept which is the basis of the system is ill-
defined and open to serious criticism. These arguments are definitely beside
the point and add nothing to the force of his denunciation of archeological
taxonomy. If, as Brew maintains, the relationships of cultural phenomena are
incomparable to those of biology, if the two spheres are so distinct as to make
the classificatory generalities of one impertinent to those of the other, then by
the same token the classificatory deficiencies of one are not pertinent to those of
the other! If it is held, for example, that the classification of European hedgehogs
is completely separate from that of Anasazi pottery, it affects the latter not
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             143

one whit to demonstrate, however conclusively, that the classification of the
former is grossly in error. A case must be tried on its own merits, not on those
of another jurisdiction. It behooves us then to examine the problems of arche-
ological classification on the basis of archeological materials themselves.
    It is a fact which can hardly be rightly disputed that culture relationships
exist between cultural materials. If the word genetic, when applied to these
relationships, bothers the archeologists and brings before their eyes bisexual
images which are not warranted by the data, then by all means let us use other
terms, say, affinal, correlative, or legatary.*°® But it cannot be denied that 1947
Ford cars owe many of their characteristics to ideas obtained from the appear-
ance and performance of the Fords (and even Chevrolets) of previous years,
or that the saddles of the Plains Indians are related to the saddles of the Spanish
horsemen who came to America many years ago, or that the atomic bomb is
an assemblage of many modes (culture ideas) and many cultural forms.
     The significance of the above examples lies in the word idea and in the
human factor. The culture relationships which do exist have been brought
 about through the minds of living beings, in the present examples through
human agency. Inanimate products themselves do not reproduce, modify, copy,
or influence one another culturally. It is the mediate agency of a mind that
brings about the culture relationships between cultural products. Therefore,
any classification which attempts to portray the relationships of human cultural
materials must do so in terms of the people who made, used, or possessed those
materials. We cannot say that Plains saddles are related to Spanish saddles
unless we are willing to define what we mean by Plains Indians and Spanish
people and unless we can prove or reasonably infer some connection, direct or
indirect, between these human groups. In other words, we must be prepared
to define, however crudely or exactly, the groups or individuals that acted as
agents for the culture relationship. Since it will be a rare case in archeological
research when a single individual can be identified as the agent, it follows that
in our discipline a more general designation will usually have to be made, i.e.,
by groups of individuals.
     Now, both in anthropology as a whole and in historiography, the human
groups which seem to have given the most satisfactory returns to investigation
are those based on one or more of the following criteria: biological heredity
(“race,” etc.), socio-political coherence (“nation,” “tribe,” village, “clan,”
family, etc.), cultural or linguistic heritage (Norse, Indo-European, etc.), and
geographic propinquity (“European,” “Midwestern,” “Danubian,” etc.). There-
fore, either as a historian or an anthropologist, the archeologist has the criteria
for several possible and demonstrably significant groups of people already set
forth. He has at least one series of classificatory goals staked out for him:
namely, to classify together in one unit all those cultural materials which can
144

be shown or reasonably inferred to have pertained to such groups of people.
This is to say that the cultural contexts which will have the more important
results, if we may judge from current historiographic and anthropologic practice,
will be those characteristic of biological, socio-political, cultural, linguistic,
and/or local groups.
     And these classificatory units are inherent in the archeological material, a
contention which is at variance with the expressed views of several arche-
ologists who have essayed theoretical discussions (e.g., Brew, 1946, p. 46;
McKern, 1939, p. 312). The objects and other manifestations with which the
archeologist deals were made, used, or possessed by individuals belonging to
groups that had definite biological heredity, lived with more or less socio-
political cohesion (unless the archeologist has discovered a hermit’s den), had a
specific cultural heritage, spoke as a mother tongue a particular language, and
occupied a determinate geographic range. And whether or not these groups can
be defined by archeological research does not alter the fact of their existence.
For example, the fact that Berlioz, the composer, was of French nationality lies
immanent in his musical compositions and provides, therefore, one way of
classifying them. The fact that from a musical point of view, i.e., culturally,
he was influenced by Beethoven is also inherent in his music and permits us to
classify it among those culturally related to Beethoven or to the “German
school.” The facts that Berlioz spoke French and lived and studied in Paris give
us other inherent ways of classifying his work. Thus, although it is the classifier
 who actually constructs the classification, as Brew has said (1946, p. 46), this
 does not controvert the fact that there are classifications which are inherent in
 the data. In archeological research, the student may or may not wish to seek
 and use them, but they are there. Although he is at perfect liberty to make his
categories arbitrary, there are inherent ones if he wishes, and is able, to
 discover them.
     Thus, as in the case of the typology and classification of objects and other
 individual manifestations, classifications of cultural contexts lie immanent in
 themselves and pertain to bygone people, not to the immediate world of the
 archeologist. The latter should realize that, potentially at least, he works on
 two levels. Empirically and “descriptively,” he may group his findings to his
 own tastes and as “arbitrarily” as he wishes. But when he either professes or
 attempts to group them “culturally,” ie., with significance for the bygone
 culture under investigation, then he should try to group them according to the
 relationships pertinent to that culture, not to his own. It is a fact, as Brew
 states (1946, p. 46), that the data do not “fall into” types or classifications:
 they must be put there by the archeologist. But this does not mean that there
 are not inherent groupings which, with luck and conscious effort and by the
 use of reasoned but free interpretation, the archeologist may succeed in repro-
 ducing or approximating, The closeness with which his groupings fit past
 TAYLOR                       A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             145

 actuality will be one      prime measure   of his service   to anthropological   and
 historiographic studies.
      This brings up another point which was mentioned at the beginning of this
  chapter and which is vital to an understanding of archeological theory,/The
 empirical data with which the archeologist has to work consist of the material
 objectifications of culture traits and their empirical attributes. The archeologist
 who works in undocumented cultures has only three sets of “these attributes
_upon which to base all his studies. They are (1) spatial relationships, (2)
_quantity, and (3) chemico-physical specifications. For example, most of his
  temporal relationships are inferences drawn from vertical or horizontal space,
  the associations of his material are purely spatial, his conceptions of cultural
  values are taken largely from relative quantity and from chemico-physical
 attributes leading to judgments of quality, his inferences as to use and function
  are taken either from,spatial association or from the physical properties of
  shape, material, etc,/His work is entirely a pyramiding of inferences based on
  these foundations, and there is no remedy for this situation. It is in the nature
  of the archeological materials, and the student might as well face it! The only
  recourse for him is to make his multitude of required inferences congenial to the
  empirical facts and as acceptable as possible to his own reasoned opinion and
  that of his colleagues.
      Therefore the problem resolves itself into how, on the basis of these empirical
  data and with only an acceptable amount of inference, the archeologist is to
  construct classifications of archeological materials which will reflect cultural
  relationships as they existed among actual, pre-existing human groups. Since
  the broader and fuller experience of historiography and the anthropology of
  the living appears to have concentrated with advantage upon groups based on
  common biological, socio-political, linguistic, cultural, and geographic factors,
  it would seem best to follow suit, if only for the sake of the comparability of
  results and at least until the systems are proved impracticable for archeological
  research.
       However, even a superficial check will show that some of the group criteria
  are, in fact, impracticable. In the first place, “racial” and other groups based
  on purely biological factors, as currently defined by the physical anthropologists,
  have proved too broad and inclusive to satisfy the requirements of “culture
  classification.”’ Also, because Americanist archeology deals, for the most part,
  with non-literate and undocumented groups, there is little if any possibility of
  using linguistic criteria for classificatory purposes. Unwritten language does not
  “fossilize,” i.e., it does not produce material objectifications to be preserved.
  Only in the case of the “direct historical approach,” when the archeologist starts
  with a documented group, or in the case of a literate society such as the Maya
  hierarchy is linguistic evidence available. Statements as to specific linguistic
  affiliations of an undocumented people are inferences, usually of a highly
146


unsupportable sort, and are based on cultural factors other than linguistic.
Although it is perhaps legitimate to assume that a culturally homogeneous site,
and one which appears to hold the remains of a relatively small social group,
say a single house structure, formerly held people who spoke a single tongue,
nevertheless when it comes to relating this site linguistically to some other site,
the archeologist is on very insecure grounds. And this is true even if the sites
seem to be culturally identical or very similar. In short and in general, neither
biological nor linguistic classifications are satisfactory for Americanist archeology.
    There seems to be at least some likelihood of correctly identifying the social
character of individual groups, as for example the family connections of single
house sites or the “clan” connections of Southwestern ‘unit dwellings.” But
here again, when it comes to projecting social inferences between such units,
the procedure is precarious. Social or political organization is not objectified
materially except through secondary phenomena such as house- and village-plan,
“clan” devices and symbols. Therefore, as with language, the relating of
bygone peoples socially or politically depends for any validity it might have
upon the similarity of predominantly, if not wholly, non-social and non-
political phenomena, i.e., a general cultural likeness in so far as it can be
inferred from material manifestations.
    Thus, whatever the case may be with regard to the characteristics of indi-
vidual undocumented groups, whenever relationships are sought between them,
the major dependence has to be placed upon cultural factors other than linguistic
and socio-political. Similarities in the material objectifications of culture are
taken to indicate cultural relationships, and the latter are often interpreted to
include socio-political or linguistic, and sometimes even biological, relationships.
But as McKern has said, “The only taxonomic basis for dealing with all cultural
manifestations, regardless of occasional direct historical tie-ups, is that of
culture type.” (1939, p. 302)
    Therefore it is the archeologist’s task to abstract his empirical data (the
spatial and quantitative attributes and relationships of his finds plus their
chemico-physical specifications) and to construct from them a picture or defini-
tion of the “culture type” of the group of people whose remains he has found
and aims to classify. The procedure by which this is to be done is more or less
laid out for him by the nature of the archeological materials. In the first place,
the archeologist is empirically given nothing more than a series of cultural
remains grouped, i.e., localized, in space. The cultural materials at one geographic
location, usually called a site, pertain to the people who occupied or utilized
that location and can be so classified empirically without recourse to inference.
Exceptions occur when, for example, the remains have been moved from their
original locus by non-human action, as of water, glaciers, rodents, but such
instances do not appreciably alter the generalization. Cultural materials “un-
disturbed” and in situ, represent the local group that made, used, or possessed
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               147

  them in the past. Since the local human groups represented by these localized
  finds are the only empirical ones with which the archeologist of non-literate
  and undocumented cultures deals, they are basic and constitute the starting point
  of all archeological taxonomy. On purely empirical grounds they may be
  marshalled into larger units based on geographic propinquity: all cultural
  materials within a certain valley or on a certain mesa or within a designated
  radius of a certain spot may be thrown together as representing the people who
  once were in that particular geographic region.
       But for the delineation of cultural relationships such geographic taxonomy,
  although empirical, is often misleading and of little value. The archeologist who,
  because he finds Mousterian and Magdalenian remains in a single cave, would
  lump them together and seek cultural comparisons for this whole undifferen-
  tiated mass of material, would find himself in serious difficulties. To be sure, he
  might find another such series of material and thus make telling comparisons,
  but would not his conclusions as to bygone cultural groups and their relation-
  ships be mistaken? In other words, it is necessary for the archeologist to analyze
  the data from his individual locations or sites and to make a judgment as to
  what remains, if any, represent a human group which actually existed as a
  cultural unit in the past. This is to say that his primary obligation is to interpret
  his site in terms of the human group or groups which used it. This is nothing
  more or less than the construction of a cultural context for the site or its
  separable components. When this has been done and, if necessary, some defini-
  tion made of the “‘culture type,” then will come the time when comparative
  and taxonomic studies can profitably be initiated.
       To put it most simply, the archeologist first separates his material empiri-
  cally on the basis of space, defining a local human group; then he separates
Lit inferentially on the basis of cultural cohesiveness, defining a cultural group;
  then he constructs a cultural context for this cultural group; and finally he
  compares this context with others similarly derived, typing and classifying
  them in order to bring out what he considers to have been their cultural
  relationships. In these procedures, two things should be emphasized again: first,
  that the primary concern of the archeologist should be directed toward a depic-
_tion of the culture of a human group represented at a single site or fraction
  thereof, not toward the placement of certain cultural manifestations in a broad
  panorama of archeological sites; second, that presence-and-absence trait lists,
  while they may prove useful tools, are neither the primary goals nor the
  vital factors in the present method that they are in the current taxonomic
 ‘systems of the Southwest and Midwest.
      As many others have pointed out, the criteria upon which taxonomic
  systems may be made (once the contexts have been constructed) can be
  widely variant depending upon the wishes, knowledge, compulsions of the
  archeologist. Furthermore, it is obvious that the criterion upon which the
  148


  primary break-down is made will be of signal importance to the results (see
  Kluckhohn and Reiter, 1939, p. 152). But granting the premises of the present
> study, the purpose of all such systematization is to depict as exactly as possible
  the cultural relationships of culturally cohesive groups of people. Therefore, if
  any classification, no matter what its primary or other criteria, seems satis-
  factorily to reflect these relationships, then its use is justified. The particular
  system is but a means to an end and if, for example, one based on a primary
  break-down along ceramic lines appears to fill requirements, there is no cause
  to attack it because it is based on only one criterion. What the archeologist is
  trying to do is to find some classification which will correspond most fully to
  what actually were the cultural relationships of human groups in the past. If he
  comes to the conclusion that the similarities of even some “inconsequential”
  category, say stone axes, follows most closely what this and other evidence
  indicates were the actual relationships, then he would be vindicated in using
  a classification of stone axes to express broader cultural relationships. By doing
  this he is not saying that the most important cultural category is that of axes
  or that he is classifying cultural wholes. He is merely saying that a primary
  break-down on this basis seems to make the most sense, serves to provide him
  with the most productive leads, is congruent with the most empirical and
  inferential details, and depicts most exactly his opinion of what the cultural
  relationships actually were.
        _Nor is there any reason to believe that a classification which has proved
  valuable in one area or for one temporal period will prove equally practicable
  in another area or at another time. It is conceivable that at one time sandals
  will be found most sensitive, while at another they will become stable and
  apparently indifferent to cultural connections. It is possible that in one region
  the paste of ceramic products will be the conservative element, against which
  design will vary with foreign influence; in another area the reverse might prove
  to be the case. Therefore I do not believe that McKern is to be followed when
   he advocates thel*Standardization”\ of classificatory determinants for systems
  as broad as that which he proposes (1939, pp. 306-307). The archeologists, like
  other students of culture, must be prepared to assess their data and change their
  tenets accordingly. The formation of a rigid system and its mechanical prosecu-
  tion is hardly warranted in view of what we already know of the nature and
  workings of culture.
      Thus, with relationships which actually obtained to be depicted and human
  groups which actually existed to be categorized, the archeologist is faced with
  the problem of developing some method for the presentation of his hypotheses.
  To date, the most satisfactory way in which relationships in general have been
  depicted has been that of( binomial classification\such as is used in biology.
  But it is important to note that this method can be used to present only those
  relationships which have already been hypothesized by the classifier. Of itself
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              149

  it does not establish relationships. It serves merely as a tool, a filing system
  into which already classified data can be put for ready reference and as an aid
  to future study.
       Therefore it is illogical for students of culture to belabor the binomial
  system because it was developed in the field of biology where sexual and bi-
  parental relationships are the rule. There is no reason to look upon it as the
  exclusive property of biology or to assume biological connotations when it is
  used. If viewed as a tool, the only problem is whether it can be of service in
  the exposition of cultural relationships and whether its mechanisms for showing
  ever widening circles of affinity can be of advantage to cultural studies. It be-
  comes a question of whether the lineages which range from ‘“‘mono-parental” to
  “multi-parental” and the asexual relationships characteristic of culture can be
  handled profitably with such a tool.
       But actually, if we examine the way in which the Midwestern and South-
  western taxonomists apply the binomial system, we will find that it is quite
  different from the way the biologists use it. This rather important fact seems
  to have escaped both the taxonomists, who have failed to use it to defend their
  position, and the critics, who have thus been arguing largely at cross purposes.
  But what is more to the present point, it provides a means of adaptation whereby
  the binomial system can be, and has been, applied to cultural matters. First,
  however, it will be well to show just how the two applications differ.
      In)biology, the name of the lowest classificatory order; the species, is truly
 /binomial,| having two terms which cannot stand apart. Thess terms represent
  not only ‘the specific characters but also the generic characteristics and affilia-
_ tions as well. Thus the specific name canadensis when appearing alone may be
  indicative of many different groupings: the bighorn sheep (Ovis c.), the elk
  (Cervus c.), the Canadian goose (Branta c.), the columbine (Aquilegia c.). Only
  when the generic term is understood does the specific term have meaning. This
  brings about a considerable rigidity in nomenclature, because, before a species
  can be identified at all, it is already burdened with more or less definite and
  broad relationships. Should the hypotheses concerning these generic relationships
  be changed, the resulting disruption in terminology, as well as in the student’s
 _thinking, is proportionately great.
      In archeology, on the other hand, the nomenclature is not binomial at all
 in any Linnaean or biological sense. Although the name of the lowest classificatory
 order consists of two terms as in biology, e.g., Orr Focus, only one of these
 terms stands for the characters of the specific group and neither represents the
 characteristics or affiliations of a higher order. The word Focus merely identifies
 the magnitude of the category and Orr designates the set of determinants. It is
 the same as if the biologists were to say “canadensis species.” There are no
 automatic ties to a higher category, and when the system is expanded and the
 Orr Focus is affiliated with the Oneota Aspect, it is only by juxtaposition and
    150

    is not inherent within the name Orr Focus itself. Therefore the archeolopical
    nomenclature is flexible, the units of classification being “free swimming”
“entities which can be attached and unattached |
|                                              ‘to larger units,‘without changing
    their given names or definitive characters.
        I believe that it is this very flexibility which makes practicable the binomial
    system for cultural manifestations in archeology. It permits the classificatory
    assignments to be changed without changing names and without an undue
    amount of confusion to plague the archeologist. If one day he decides that the
    Orr Focus belongs in the Oneota Aspect and the next that it belongs in the
    Fort Ancient Aspect, he is not required to change his nomenclature or to re-
    arrange other units whose relationships to the Orr Focus are proclaimed by
    their names. All he has to do is to shift the Orr Focus bodily into another
    pigeonhole and take care of the resultant gymnastics in his thinking when he
    deals with it. Taxonomy in archeology should be viewed as a system of working
    hypotheses which may be changed as the evidence warrants and opinion changes.
    It is illogical to cry with one breath that cultural taxonomy is incomparable to
    that of other fields, yet with the next to condemn it because it is not equally
    steadfast and sure! It is very possible, if not highly probable, that the very
    incomparability lies in its uncertainty and more tentative character, which in
    turn is due to the nature of its materials and the procedures required to handle
    them.
        These same factors contrive to make archeological taxonomy a matter of
    judgment and not the automatic and “objective” outcome of manipulating
    cultural abstractions. The cultural contexts and their constituent elements have
    been established on the basis of large amounts of interpretation and hypothesis,
    and it is hardly to be expected that suddenly on the comparative level there
    will be a reversal so that mechanically applied systems will solve the problems.
    We can agree with Steward that
      . . strict adherence to a method drawn from biology inevitably fails to take into
    account the distinctively cultural and unbiological fact of blends or crosses between
    essentially unlike types. (1941, p. 366)

    But the archeological method, whether drawn from biology or not, at the
    present time does not resemble the biological method except in so far as it
    attempts to depict the branching quality of relationships by the use of a
    dendritic or tree-like pattern. Brew has taken exception to this usage because
    of its biological overtones (1946, pp. 52ff), but it is not too much to point
    out that a dendritic pattern is not the exclusive property of biology, e.g., it is a
    characteristic of river drainages and the deposition of minerals upon stone. That
    it is also a characteristic of cultural relationships can be easily seen if one takes
    the trouble to analyze graphically such a body of data as given by Kroeber on
    the spread of the alphabet. (1923, pp. 263ff)
         It is true that cultural derivations are often multiple and the dendritic
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             151

 pattern thus complicated. But this means nothing more than that the archeolo-
 gist who would set a given manifestation upon some one “branch” or “stem”
 must decide which, if any, are the most fundamental and significant influences,
 either for his present problem or the cultural context as a whole. In a compar-
 able instance, Leslie Spier found no difficulty in identifying Havasupai culture
 as fundamentally Basin, although it has obviously received strong influences
 from several other sources (1929, p. 219). Spier analyzed the data, made his
 decision, and assigned the culture to the category with which it seemed to him
 to display the most basic connections. The same can be done with archeological
 data, providing only that the bases for the decision are made plain for the
 evaluation of the reader. Trait lists and mathematical treatment may well be of
 service in clarifying the material, but alone they cannot be expected to solve
 the problem for the very reason that these relationships ave multiple and an
 assessment of their relative importance is in the majority of cases a question of
 judgment, not of mathematics.
     To me there seems no barrier to classifying a given cultural manifestation
 as a whole in one category and, either for other purposes or for a more detailed
 accounting, to classify its component parts with completely different units. For
 example, the cultural context of Component A as a whole might appear to have
 its most basic relationships with Component B, while at the same time its
 ceramic complex shows overwhelming influence from Component C. As long as
 the evidence is given, I can see no trouble in grouping Components A and B
 together when the intent is to show over-all relations. When, however, detailed
ceramic studies are in order, Component A could be grouped with Component C.
 The same procedure can extend down the scale: when the data require, the
 ceramic complex as a whole might be grouped one way while some of its seg-
ments are grouped otherwise.
     In short, as Brew has said (1946, pp. 46, 65), we need more, not fewer
classifications. But there is little reason to expect that any rigidly applied,
mathematical, ‘‘standardized” system will of itself be satisfactory for the
presentation of cultural relationships. The archeologist and his system need to
be flexible and able to change with the changing demands of his complicated
and disconnected material. If so many judgments must be made throughout the
process it comes to a question, not of denying and shunning them, but of
seeing how explicitly and how soundly the necessary ones can be made, pre-
sented, and supported. On these grounds, then, there seem to be no substantial
arguments against using a binomial system to depict cultural relationships as
they are envisioned by the archeologist. If he will not apply it after the fashion
of biology and then decry it because it brings biological connotations, but if
he will adapt it to his own needs and at the same time keep it flexible, he may
feel free to use it as a means. Let it carry him as far as it will, and then let
him leave it. In a burning desert, let us not throw away our parasol because
it is marked “Made in Japan.”
                               CHAPTER          6

AN OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES             FOR THE CONJUNCTIVE            APPROACH

ee                the important and distinctive features of the conjunctive ap-
       proach lie in the mental attitude and the broad objectives with which the
archeologist attacks his research, and although actual methods and techniques
will differ in individual instances, nevertheless it is appropriate that some ex-
position be given of the practical means by which such an attitude may receive
concrete expression and through which such objectives may be attained. In the
following pages, then, an annotated outline of these means will be given. From
the start, however, it must be recognized that any archeological scheme is,
of necessity, subject to modification, elaboration, and even radical change in
response to particular circumstances and the dictates of practicalities such as
time and finance. Therefore, the outline to be set forth here has but one purpose:
to provide a more or less concrete exposition of ideas basic to the conjunctive
approach. Exhaustiveness is neither claimed nor achieved. The intent is merely
to project some of the “flavor,” some of the conceptualization behind this
approach.
   The concrete examples used in the following pages will be found to come
predominantly from my own, unpublished work. I do not wish this fact to
convey the impression that I consider myself to be the only archeologist to
have attempted such studies. I have already cited others whose work follows
the lines here advocated. The purpose of drawing from my own researches has
been to provide would-be critics with something tangible to analyze and cite,
inasmuch as my archeological writings have heretofore been very few. In
view of my many remarks on the published work of others, I felt that not so
to provide would open me to justifiable accusations of hiding behind the skirts
of non-publication,
    Table 4 gives the levels and sub-levels of procedure that characterize the
conjunctive approach. While in general the levels are sequentially arranged
according to actual procedure, it is obvious that much latitude may be allowed
in this regard. For instance, the studying of data may proceed together with
its collection, rather than after, as for instance in the case of material which
cannot be removed from the field or which is destroyed during excavation: e.g.,
Maya buildings and occupation levels within a shell mound. Nor are the
headings mutually exclusive or segregated according to cultural criteria. They
are inclusive and descriptive, representing merely a working scheme to suggest,
not dictate, the mechanics of archeological research.
    In the following analysis of Table 4, and hence of the conjunctive approach,
                                       152
TAYLOR   _                 A STUDY OF ARCHEOLOGY                        153


                                      TABLE     4



             A. PROBLEM
             B. Dara
                  1. Collection
                       a. Local cultural
                                1) Artifacts
                               2) Cultural refuse
                               3) Deposits
                       ou.   Local human biological
                       ©     Contemporaneous geographical
                                1) Geological
                                2) Meteorological
                                3) Floral
                                4) Faunal
                       d. Non-local human
                                1) Contemporaneous
                                2) Pre-local
                                3) Post-local
                       e. Non-contemporaneous geographical
                                1) Pre-local
                                2) Post-local
                  2. Study
                       a. Criticism of validity of data
                       b. Analysis
                       c. Interpretation
                       d. Description
                 3. Presentation
             C. Locat CHronoLocy (chronicle)
             D. SYNTHESIS AND CoNTEXT (ethnography or historiography)
             E. ComPARATIVE (ethnology)
                  1. Cultural
                  2. Chronological
             F. Srupy or CutturE, Irs NATURE AND Workin¢cs (anthropology)
154


the category Problem will be treated first. But from that point onward, the table
will be discussed in reverse order. The reason for this reversal is plain. The
type of data to be collected and the very manner of collecting depends on the
kind of information which it is desired eventually to utilize when the time
comes for synthesis and study. Thus, if there is given an idea of the informa-
tion which the conjunctive approach aims to include in its cultural contexts, the
required data and the means for collecting them can be more easily visualized.
If, for instance, it is shown that sound inferences as to modes and configurations
can be abstracted from particular archeological data, then the means can be
sought whereby these data and others like them can be brought to light.

                                   A. PROBLEM
     It has been said, and it is true, that the problems which have brought stu-
dents to the field of archeology and to their respective sites have been widely
varied. Given this range, it is natural that the approaches to, and the results of
excavation should also show considerable variation. Natural or not, this state
of affairs when reflected in the actual collection of archeological data is not only
unsatisfactory—it is also positively disastrous. Personal problems and objectives
which are pursued at the expense of collecting other data are unwarranted.
     The archivist and the experimental scientist may with impunity select from
their sources those facts which have for them a personal and immediate signifi-
cance in terms of some special problem. Their libraries and experimental fa-
cilities may be expected to endure, so that in the future there may be access to
the same or a similar body of data. If, however, it were certain that, after the
archivist’s first perusal, each document would be utterly and forever destroyed,
it would undoubtedly be required of him that he transcribe the entire record
rather than just that portion which at the moment interests him. He’ would
have difficulty in justifying his research if, knowingly, he caused the destruction
of a unique record for the sake of abstracting only a narrowly selected part.
     The gathering of data from archeological sites, in nearly every instance,
involves the destruction of the original record. Only to the extent to which that
record is transposed to the archeologist’s notes is it preserved for study either
by the collector himself or by other students. A good axiom for archeologists is
that “it is not what you find, but how you find it,” and it is superfluous to
point out that “how you find it” can be told only from notes and not specimens.
An archeological find is only as good as the notes upon it. Therefore only one
objective can be sanctioned with regard to the actual excavation of archeological
sites: that of securing the most complete record possible, not only of those
details which are of interest to the collector, but of the entire geographic and
human environment. That which is not recorded is most often entirely lost. In
such a situation, selection implies wanton waste.
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               155

     It should not be understood that the above remarks indicate a protest against
   special problems or specific objectives in archeological research. The case is
   distinctly otherwise. What the statements do mean, however, is that questions of
__problem and objectives, in so faras they are limiting and abridging factors,
 _should be confined to two stages in the procedure of investigation and, above
 _all, that they should not inhibit the excavations themselves.
       As the first of these stages, the choice of area of investigation and of the
  ‘sites to be dug should be made with reference to specific problems. And the
~ word should is used advisedly. These problems may be of many sorts and by
   their nature will indicate the type of final conclusions to be expected from the
   investigation. The archeologist’s interest may be in art or architecture, in phil-
   ology, or in the corroboration of myths and legends. His interest may be
   purely chronological, being directed toward the sequential arrangement of the
   data or toward the determination of specific dates for certain manifestations; it
   may be historiographical, leading him to construct temporally sequential series
   of cultural contexts or to describe the culture of a given area at a given time;
   or it may be anthropological, leading him to select his area and site with a view
   to testing some hypothesis as to the nature and workings of culture.
        But after the selection has been made and when the actual excavation is
   begun, there can be only one objective: to exploit fully and without abridgement
   the cultural and geographic record contained within the site attacked. There is no
   justification in discarding or failing to record projectile points, for example, be-
   cause of a single-minded concern with ceramic chronology. No more is there justifi-
   cation in neglecting the local, the peculiar, the atypical data, just because
   they are not useful for comparative purposes outside of the site. Within his
   broadly given cultural and geographic universe, the archeologist is a technician
   concerned with the production of data, and, although he should be aware of the
   concepts and goals of many disciplines, he should not be restricted in his exploita-
   tion of the site by the dictates of any of them. Time will come in his study and
   analysis when these factors will again assume the major role, but when he puts
 _spade to ground the archeologist should be dedicated to an exposition unconfined
   except by the broadest stretch of the cultural and geographic frame of reference.
  This is what makes archeology a technique and the archeologist, as archeologist,
  a technician. His particular problems are concerned with the production of
  ‘data. When he makes use of these data to some purpose, he becomes affiliated
   with the discipline whose concepts he employs and whose aims he serves.
       Likewise, the archeologist is obligated to preserve, whether in publication or
  some permanent repository, the full body of his empirical data and records.
  Since he has destroyed the original record, his transcript and the recovered
  specimens are the only substitute. The archeologist has no more justification in
  submerging part of the record than he would have had in destroying, without
 156


 record, a part of the original site. Practical considerations such as space and
 money have sometimes been blamed for the failure to preserve the record fully.
 However valid these factors may be, the extent of their victory over the ideal of
 full preservation is a measure of the defeat of the very excavations which have
 been accomplished.
      With regard to the publication of the record, practical considerations enter
 the picture. But whatever the means of accomplishment, one thing is certain:
 it is incumbent upon the archeologist to publish the empirical bases for all his
 inferences in order that the reader may judge for himself their acceptability.
 Conclusions unsupported by adduced empirical data carry the implication that
 they are to be taken at face value, without criticism or doubt. It is a dubious
 procedure to put the contributing evidence out of reach of interested students.
 This topic will be examined at somewhat greater length below; it is enough that
 it be mentioned here.
     The second stage of procedure wherein special problems may determine the
 nature of archeological research comes after the empirical record has been
 gathered. The archeologist has fulfilled his obligation by transposing the record
 from the ground to some form, both permanent and available. From this point
 onward, his own personal interest may again take possession and guide his
 further use of the data. Perhaps he wishes to study the chronological develop-
 ment of art forms. Perhaps he wishes to write history and construct a cultural
 context. Perhaps he wishes to study culture itself and also construct a context
 in order to examine its internal and external relationships. Whatever his interests,
 they may again take over.

                F, STUDY   OF CULTURE, ITS NATURE      AND WORKINGS
       That the study of archeological materials can, in fact, give insights into the
 modes, archetypes, and configurations of bygone cultures is contrary to the
 expressed beliefs of many anthropologists. Boas, Griffin, Kidder and Thompson,
 Lowie, Speck, among others, have made statements to the effect that archeology
 deals only with the material aspects of culture and cannot aspire to information
 regarding non-material aspects.’’° But if anthropology, as the study of culture,
 is to be able to generalize fully, to base its conclusions on the broadest founda-
_tions, it cannot be satisfied with data gathered only from the shallow depth pro-
 vided by the ethnographic reach. To quote Randall’s very pertinent remark
 made in a somewhat different context:
When one has reached an understanding of what materials are furnished by the world
around him, and what resources he can hope for inside himself, it still remains for
him to appraise the past as it is left to operate in the present. . . . (1940, p. 6)
     Anthropology cannot afford to reject the help of other disciplines, archeology
 included. It should at least attempt to give its statements as much perspective as
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                157

  possible, and the disciplineof archeology should attempt to help in this project.
 This can be done, in one way, by making full use of the archeological record
 _within the limits, not of dogma, but of demonstrated value. And “demonstrated
_value”’ calls for just that, demonstration: attempts to push archeological methods
__and techniques to their, utmost, willingness to excavate and record and describe
 with thorough utilization of the empirical data (both specifications andaffinities) ,
_.and then_a willingness to provide an interpretation for the finds.
     This last has been called “sticking the neck out.” But such a reaction to
  interpretation is unjustified. Once the empirical information has been presented,
__the archeologist has his right as well as hig duty,as the man on the job, to give
 _his understanding of the data. This understanding is open to criticism only on
  logical and empirical grounds. The fact that an interpretation has been offered
  is definitely not open to criticism ipso facto. Nor is it subject to refutation
  on the grounds of alternate opinion except in so far as this alternate opinion is
  itself founded upon more acceptable evidence than, or better and more economi-
  cal use of, the evidence originally adduced. In other words, reason and argu-
  mentation, not polemic, should be the resort of the critics. AsMandelbaum put
  it:
 No sociological understanding of the conditions under which the statement was made
 bears the slightest resemblance to an estimate of the truth or falsity of the statement
 itself. [After the truth or falsity is judged by recourse to other statements of fact, we
 may reexamine the original statement in the light of the stater’s background to
 ascertain how or why he made a correct or false statement.] (1938, pp. 183-184)
        With the proper and sensible proviso that conclusions are based on “the facts
 _at hand” and are subject to revision in the light of fuller and better data, it isa
 _ premise of the conjunctive approach that interpretations are both justified and
_ required, when once the empirical grounds have been made explicit. Why has
   revision been such a bugbear to archeologists? Other disciplines are constantly
   reworking their hypotheses and formulating new ones upon which to proceed
   with further research. When these are found to demand modification and change
   they are altered. Why should archeology assume the pretentious burden of in-
   fallibility? Why is it not possible to project hypotheses, specifically labeled as
   such, and then to go on from these toward testing and answering the questions
   thus raised? Why should every archeological hypothesis have to stand and be
   correct for all time?’
       Furthermore, as I have already said with specific regard to pottery taxonomy
   (Chapter 5, pp. 128ff), I do not believe that criticism merely on the grounds of
   too few data will hold water. If the data are conclusive enough, even a very
   few will serve to establish a point. A most pertinent statement is offered by
   Cohen and Nagel:
 In a well-known passage, Mill remarks that often a very large number of verifying
 158


 instances is insufficient to establish firmly a generalization (for example, that all
 crows are black), while a few such instances are sufficient to win our assent to others
 (for example, that a certain type of mushroom is poisonous). (1934, p. 279)

  If the evidence will not bear the weight of the interpretation, it is not merely
  that it is too scanty, but because it is first of all too poor and then too scanty.
  For example, if we should infer the presence of the atlatl from a single, rather
  heavy, chipped stone point found in some pithouse, there might be understand-
  able reasons for doubt because of the ambiguous nature of the criterion. But the
  fact that only one was found could not rightly be the reason, because if a single
  unquestionable atlatl hook had been found, there could have been no doubt at all.
  And finally, even if the data are not “good enough and conclusive enough,” if they
  are all the archeologist has, then he has not only a right but also an obligation to
  do what ‘he can with them, of course describing their nature and limitations. A_
__policy of wait-until-all-the-evidence-is-in can stunt the growth of archeology to
 _a dangerous degree. The man on the job has tremendous advantages over stu-
  dents who might wish, at some later time, to make use of his specimens and
  records.
      Returning from this brief digression on critical standards and assuming for
  the moment that archeology can produce information pertinent to the study of
  culture itself, it may be required to show that such information is of a sort
  sufficiently important to justify its derivation and presentation. It has been
  my experience on several occasions to be forced to answer challenges to the
  effect that: “Such material is much more easily obtained, and in much greater
  detail and quantity, from living groups. Why struggle to derive it from the
  archeological records?” A few answers to this question may be given here in
  cursory fashion.
       Granting that information as to the nature and processes of culture might
  more easily be abstracted from living groups, it still remains that nothing has
  been granted as to the adequacy of such treatment. The information may hold
  true for living groups, but nothing is thus proved as to its applicability in the
  past. Whether the same conditions existed then or are recent developments,
  whether specific aspects are due to demonstrable borrowing or are native as far
  back as we can go: these are vital questions not to be answered with data from
  a single time-plane. Furthermore, “‘as far back as we can go”’ does not end with
  the memory of the oldest living informant or the most ancient written document!
  Despite the interest and importance of cultural data from a shallow time-depth,
  statements of fact, without information as to how the facts got that way, have a
  faculty of badly misleading the investigator and of being highly inadequate
  therefore (see: Lesser, 1935; Miller, 1939, pp. 39ff.). What boots it if two end-
  points in our particular way of looking at things are similar, if actually they are
  the products of entirely different biological and/or social stimuli? For some
TAYLOR                        A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               159

purposes a bionomic classification which groups together whales, sharks, and fishes
is of value, but does this exhaust the possible and significant ways of viewing
them? Many anthropologists and a host of biological taxonomists have shown
that this is not so. By the same reasoning, then, it is maintained that the study of
culture is potentially a gainer from the use of the archeological record, providing
only that the record is capable of producing the pertinent information.
   The crucial test is whether data on the nature and workings of culture and
particularly on the non-material aspects of cultural phenomena can be derived
from archeological material. The following examples are given to demonstrate
that such derivations can be made and to give an idea of the sort of information
which archeological data will produce when viewed with a certain attitude, ice.,
that designated here as the conjunctive approach.     The examples are not finished
pieces of research, and represent some of the first attacks upon a difficult and
complex problem by one individual. Consequently they may seem to be isolated
instances rather than integral and widely connected parts of detailed contexts.
However this may be, the reader is asked to imagine them as actually in con-
text and to visualize what the picture would be if all aspects of the local culture
manifestation had been similarly treated.

     During cave excavations conducted for the U. S. National Museum in the
 State of Coahuila, Mexico, one small burial cave was found to contain a number
of large fragments of plaited mats and several coiled baskets in addition to its
other contents.''* Although the cultural relations of this site are not definitely
established as yet, it appears probable that the contained artifacts and skeletal
material are related to similar finds in the Laguna District of Coahuila immedi-
ately to the south. The latter area has produced the justly famous Palmer collec-
tion, lodged in the Peabody Museum of Harvard, and one burial bundle housed
in the U. S. National Museum. This latter bundle I have studied in detail, and
the Harvard specimens I have examined superficially.1’*
     When the material from the northern burial cave and the presumably related
finds from the Laguna District are examined, one thing is immediately apparent:
although clearly demonstrating a mastery of the various techniques of manu-
facture and indicating a strong tendency toward decoration, the fabrics display
a startling and pervasive lack of regular pattern or design. Symmetry and regu-
larity in the over-all use of decoration are absent. The areas in which variation of
weaving   technique     and use of color have   been employed   to create   decoration
appear to be placed with no regard for design unity or symmetry. Even within
the techniques themselves, although mechanically they are extremely well exe-
cuted, there is no consistency: spacing, weave-counts, and measurements vary at
random in all but an insignificantly few instances. Plate 1 will give visual support
to these contentions.
160


     In direct contrast to this lack of symmetry, to this unconcern with over-all
patterning, is the use of decoration among the San Juan Basket-Maker. Plate 2
will indicate the high development of a sense of design found in Basket-Maker
materials. Here there is a definite conceptualization of a decorative whole adapted
to the structural whole. The apparent ‘“‘need” or desire for decoration is channeled
by what seem to be the dictates of a visualized entity which applies both to textile
fabrics and to the obviously derived treatment of ceramic products. In other
words, whatever the origin, whether in the mechanics of weaving technique or
otherwise, the people represented by the Basket-Maker remains possessed a con-
ception of decorative wholes in their textile and pottery complexes.
     This difference between Coahuila and San Juan textile decoration cannot be
accounted for on the basis of differing techniques or materials. Although these
vary between the two regions, the mechanical excellence and control exhibited
in all the specimens rule out the possibility that the decorative idiosyncracies
of the Coahuila people are attributable to their lesser abilities as artisans or
to any relative intractability of their materials. For example, it surely is a fact
that plaiting is a simpler technique than either twining or coiling and no less
regular; yet the Coahuila plaited specimens, while showing remarkable versatility
 and control in technique, nevertheless are decoratively the most irregular of ail
and cannot be compared in this respect with the twined and coiled textiles from
Basket-Maker sites. Also, an analysis of Coahuila netting shows that there is an
exceptional control of technique and that the irregularities of design arise from
a failure to perform regularly the purely mechanical functions of counting rows,
 choosing colors, etc., and not from failures of manipulation. The fact that a few
 Coahuila textiles show regularity, at least in small sections, indicates that they
 could do this sort of work. That they did not do so more often conveys the
 idea that they were not concerned with producing regularity. I feel it is making
 only a permissible judgment to state that both areas show an equal control over
 their media and that the difference in textile decoration is due to other factors
 than techniques or materials.
     It seems merely to be a fact that one group had, and the other did not have,
 the inclination, the conceptualization, the uniformity of culture ideas, in short the
 configuration, which resulted in the construction of over-all designs on textile
 fabrics. What has been demonstrated from this set of archeological details, I
 believe, is a culture configuration in the sense in which Kluckhohn has used the
 term. He says:
 To a considerable extent patterns are arrived at by simple abstraction from trends
 toward uniformity in statement and deed. . . . Configuration looks to an immer
 coherence in terms of the large structuralizing principles which prevail in the covert
culture, Patterns are forms; configurations are, so to speak, interrelationships between
 forms. (1941, p. 126; see also: Kluckhohn, 1943)
                                                                        TAYLOR   PLATE   1

                           soit celtetiithe ,




KAR       XX KRYWW



                                                            I
                                                                Y
                                                                ¥
                                                                M4
                                                              xy
                                                              Vv
                                                              NA
                                                                Y
                                                                vv
                                                                 y
                                                           Voc>
                                                            <2
               CM 79-FI9
               a
                 10 cm.




                                                 (a)




                          \COVOTE CAVECES
                              i                 ONE
                                                 (b)
              a) Twill plaited mats from Cave CM 79, Coahuila, Mexico
                 (Black splotches represent areas covered by red paint.)
      b) Textile of knotless netting from Coyote Cave, CM 88, Coahuila, Mexico
                              (Actual colors not represented.)
                                                                                   TAYLOR     PLATE     2




Basket-Maker   basketry   from   Northeastern   Arizona.   (From   “Basket-Maker   Caves    of North-
  eastern Arizona,” by Samuel J. Guernsey and Alfred V. Kidder,
                                                                Papers of the Peabody
               Museum,    Harvard   University, Vol. VIII, No. 2, 1921. Plate 24.)
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             161


The pattern for the San Juan is over-all design fitted to the structure of textile
fabrics (and ceramics). The structuralizing principle which holds the pattern °
together is the configuration which may be verbalized as “regularized decorative
wholes.” The reverse configuration was present among the people who produced
the material found in the Coahuila caves, i.e., “unconcern with regularized
decorative wholes.”
     It should be pointed out that these configurations, as they appear from the
textile data, may be incomplete. It is possible, if not probable, that the currently
envisioned ones represent but parts of broader configurations which structure
other patterns of Basket-Maker and Coahuila culture. In fact, if the modern
Pueblos are to be viewed as the cultural decendants of the San Juan Basket-
Makers, it seems highly probable that the configuration, to which their ancient
textile patterns are but a partial clue, is actually something like “symmetry and
regularity of wholes.” Pottery design and turquoise mosaic, pilastered kivas and
the D-shaped pueblo form, the uniformity and symmetry of ceremonial and
social patterning among the recent Pueblo peoples, these and many other cul-
tural items of the Anasazi and their cultural descendants lend weight to the
belief that the pattern of over-all design on Basket-Maker textiles was supported
by a broad structuralizing configuration which entered into other patterns as
well. Here then, if the analysis has been correct and holds up in the light of
further evidence, is a cultural configuration of considerable temporal persistence,
and concrete evidence has been adduced from the data of archeology to the
hypothesis, offered by Boas and others (Boas, 1934, p. xiii; Kluckhohn, 1941,
p. 127), that culture configurations often have a remarkable permanency as com-
pared with specific content which shows more frequent change.
     The implications of this analysis for the definition of Coahuila culture are
also important, but more study will have to be done upon other aspects of culture
in this region before a clearer understanding of these implications will be pos-
sible. For example, does the configuration of “unconcern with regularized deco-
rative wholes” also imply the absence of regularity and symmetry in other
patterns? Or were there compensatory adjustments to counterbalance, with
regularity in other patterns, the lack of it in textile decoration? The test lies in
a fuller knowledge of the culture, and this will come only with further excava-
tion and more extended study of documentary sources. But one point seems
established: there is a marked difference in a broad culture configuration between
Coahuila and the San Juan, and thus it is expectable that more than one cultural
pattern is different in the two areas. These observations, taken in conjunction
with other information, reduce the possibility that the Basket-Makers and the
people of Coahuila were closely related culturally or are to be included within a
single category in any classification which professes to depict the more detailed
cultural relationships of human groups. In short, it is very doubtful that the
162


Coahuila people possessed a “north Mexican form of Basket-Maker             culture.”
(Roberts, 1932, p. 16; see also: Guernsey, 1931, p. 112)

    The next example has to do with the twisted fiber cordage from two locations:
six caves in northern Coahuila" and Lovelock Cave, Nevada (Loud and
Harrington, 1929). At the latter site, “twine” was usually twisted with a right
twist (see definition in Amsden, 1930): out of 1,973 specimens only 14 were
twisted to the left. Furthermore, when the ancient inhabitants of Lovelock
twisted two or more two-ply cords together to make what may be termed com-
pound cord, in all cases the basic cords were of normal (right) twist. But since
it seems to be a mechanical principle of string-making that the direction must
be reversed in each successive twisting (Roth, 1924, p. 112), the final product
of Lovelock compound cord was twisted to the ieft, which produced a contrast
with the normal. Their two-ply and their compound cordage are thus of different
spirals and different final appearance.

                                        TABLE   5


                                           INITIAL        FINAL           FINAL
                                            Twist         TwIst        APPEARANCE

                         Two-ply.....           —         right
      Lovelock                                                            different
                         Compound...        right         left

                         Two-ply.....           =         left
      Coahuila (CM 95)                                                    same
                         Compound...        right         left


     The specimens from Coahuila were twisted with a left twist in all but one of
the sixty examples studied. A quick survey of cordage from other regions of the
state indicates that this practice is the usual one throughout the area. In making
compound cords, however, the basic two-ply strings were first twisted to the right,
i.e., abnormally, so that when these were combined, through the mechanical prin-
ciple of reversing the direction of the spiral, the result was a compound cord with
a left, or normal, twist. Thus in Coahuila, two-ply and compound cords were
of the same spiral and the same final appearance.
      Although the numbers of compound specimens in this example are prob-
ably insignificantly few (eight from Lovelock including what seems to be a falsely
identified exception; four from one Coahuila cave, CM 95), this should not
 affect the implications of the results. In the first place, the four and eight speci-
mens comprise the total number of compound cords reported from the respective
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             163

sites and, therefore, represent a 100 per cent conformance within a total universe,
not a sample. Secondly, although this fact would appear to suggest some actual
validity for the data, in the present context the idea is the important thing, not
the eventually established truth of the conclusions. The example has been given to
show what sort of information may be derived from archeological materials, and
not to reach any verdict or solve any specific problems with reference to Nevada
or Coahuila cave cultures.
     To continue with the analysis: it seems that, as in the case of textile design
stated above, there are two conceptualizations, one being the opposite of the
other. It appears that the Coahuila people, when they desired a strong compound
cord, visualized the whole process and reversed their normal procedure at the
start so that the final product would conform to their idea of how finished cordage
should be twisted. The Lovelock people, on the other hand, appear to have
been unconcerned with the final form and merely continued their usual procedure
one step further and, by the machinations of technique, came out with compound
cords having a spiral different from the majority of their cordage. One group
visualized compound cord and allowed for it from the start; the other merely
put together several two-ply strings to make a stronger twine. The Coahuila
people would seem to have had an ideal pattern for string, and they saw to it
that the final product conformed, whether it was two-ply or compound. There
was a Sense of order, a conscious or unconscious structuring of a pattern.
    How does this configuration, with its implications of regularity, affect the
formerly identified Coahuila (textile) configuration of ‘“unconcern with regular-
ized decorative wholes?” To mention but one thing, it points to the probability
that the latter is not part of an otherwise possible, broader configuration such as
“unconcern with regularity and symmetry.” In this fashion it serves as a check
or balance, a modifier of the first conclusion. Just exactly what the two, some-
what opposed, configurations do mean in relation to one another and to the
culture as a whole is a problem which must wait upon more, and more compre-
hensive, data. But it is to be hoped, indeed expected, that when enough of
these structuring ideas have been defined on enough evidence, they may be
weighed against one another to arrive at an acceptable insight into the covert
culture of the Coahuila Indians. The importance of this outcome, for historio-
graphic depth and for the study of culture itself, needs no elaboration.

    In the south-central, mountainous portion of the Southwest, Haury and
others have uncovered materials which they have designated as the Mogollon
culture (Haury, 1936b). This is characterized in its earlier, more diagnostic
periods by a ceramic tradition of polished brown ware which, when painted, dis-
plays a red pigment. After a period of time, the Mogollon is thought by some to
have developed into the Mimbres culture with the aid of influences from other
164


areas. One of the elements by which the Anasazi influences are recognized is that
of black-on-white pottery.
    As transitional between the black-on-white ceramics of the later and the
red-on-brown ceramics of the earlier phases, the pottery type known as Three
Circle Red-on-white is found. Haury says:
The adoption of a white background and the appearances of small unpainted zones
in the decorative field is doubtless to be attributed to the influence of northern
potters, ... (1936c, p. 21)

If this hypothesis is accepted, what are the implications of the existence of the
pottery type called Three Circle Red-on-white? Concerning its value Haury
makes but one remark:
For this reason [its short temporal span], and because it did not represent a stage
when other traits, as architecture, had attained a characteristic development, Three
Circle Red-on-white has not been accorded the same value as other types, namely,
as a basic component of a phase. (1936c, p. 20)

That is to say: since there is little or no value to be found in the type for
taxonomic purposes, it is to be accorded no further attention. To date, as far
as I have been able to learn, there has been no analysis of the intra-cultural mean-
ing of the Three Circle pottery type.
    The ceramic tradition of the Mogollon culture included the use of an oxidizing
firing atmosphere which produced a brown surface color and a red decoration. The
Anasazi tradition included a reducing atmosphere which produced a white or
gray surface color and black decoration. Assuming the actuality of Anasazi
influence upon the Mogollon, what inferences may be drawn from the pottery
sequence in the latter culture: Mogollon Red-on-brown> Three Circle Red-on-
white >Mimbres Bold Face Black-on-white? The first two types are closely
related as Haury has said (1936b, pp. 94, 96), but this affinity is marred by the
white surface on the later one. This is most probably due to the northern influ-
ence. But Three Circle still carries red paint and is still fired in an oxidizing
atmosphere using an iron-free slip to achieve the white surface. The inference
is clear: at the incidence of Anasazi influence, the Mogollon potters acquired a
desire for white surface and a contrasting paint, but they attained their results
by variations upon their own techniques of manufacture. Later, possibly through
closer contact and a transference of a knowledge of pigments, or by their own
experimentation to obtain a more exact copy of the northern ideal, the Mogollon
potters attained, in their Mimbres Bold Face Black-on-white, the black decora-
tion characteristic of northern wares. But here again, their own oxidizing tech-
nique was employed, and a reversion to red decoration was occasionally achieved
by the expedient of changing firing conditions and/or paint composition.
     In the case of Three Circle Red-on-white, perhaps the Mogollon people had
tried to produce a black but had failed and were forced to retain their original
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               165

color. Perhaps they were impressed only by the white surface and were not
interested in producing black paint at all. Perhaps something in their own culture,
color symbolism for example, erected a barrier against the initial acceptance of
the color black. Whatever the answers to these questions, the importance of
Three Circle Red-on-white is not to be judged solely on its lack of taxonomic
value. If the above hypotheses are acceptable, here is an archeological example
of the persistence of techniques of manufacture during a radical change in decora-
tive style. It is a case to parallel that which W. W. Hill cites for ethnographic
data when he says:
However, they [the ceremonial examples cited] do seem to indicate not only a
stability of the religious aspects of the culture but also that any changes which are
made and attempted will be within the ideology of the existing pattern. (1939, p. 260)

    Spier and Wissler have both pointed to the fact that often a cultural
phenomenon is taken over by a group which then proceeds to make use of it
according to the patterns and configurations with which it itself is familiar instead
of those which have influenced the donor group (Spier, 1921, pp. 500, 511-516,
520-521; 1929, pp. 220-221; Wissler, 1915, p. 38). Also an archeological example
of the workings of stimulus diffusion has been illustrated (see Kroeber, 1940).

     For some years the area around Flagstaff, Arizona, has been recognized as the
meeting place of several ancient culture streams (Colton, 1939). The Museum
of Northern Arizona has been working on the archeological problems of this
region with a rare and exemplary consistency, and it is very apparent that the
purpose of its investigations has been to place the many sites and components in
taxonomic categories relative to each other. Except for brief sentences in rare
publications, the approach has been purely comparative, and the cultural contexts
and their implications for the nature and workings of culture have been left
strictly alone.
     However, there are other ways of looking at the data and an example will be
given here. In one of his latest papers, significantly entitled Archaeology and the
Reconstruction of History (1942), H. S. Colton, of the Museum of Northern
Arizona, gives some very provocative information on the diffusion and persist-
ence of “traits” over the frontier between        two of his taxonomic     categories
(Branches) which he identifies as “tribes.”
    1. The traits of the Kayenta [Branch] and Sinagua [Branch] which did not
diffuse are: (a) earth lodge shape .. . (b) two post roof support absent in Kayenta,
present sometimes in Sinagua; (c) ball court absent in Kayenta, present in Sinagua;
(d) sipapu . . . (e) method of shaping pottery ... (f) axes... (g) black pottery
paint . . . (h) firing atmosphere . . . (i) inhumation flexed in Kayenta, extended in
Sinagua.
    2. Traits that seem to have diffused from the Kayenta to the Sinagua, 900-1100
166


A.D., across the border are: (a) ventilators; (b) deflector; and (c) good masonry
construction. After 1100 the masonry, multifamily pueblo was accepted by the
Sinagua.                                                                   ¢
    3. No true Sinagua traits seem to have crossed the border to the Kayenta
between 900 and 1100 A.D.....        After 1100 A.D., the use of white paint on red
pottery crossed to the Kayenta.
    4. Certain traits are shared by both the Kayenta and Sinagua, 900-1100 A.D.:
(a) earth lodge entered through a hole in the roof; (b) four post roof support .. . (c)
coiled and bundle basketry; (d) cotton textiles woven on a loom; (e) grooved metate;
and (f) burial offerings. (1942, p. 37)

     Taking all these data at their face value for the moment, here is a set of facts
begging for attention. Colton addresses them with the purpose of “reconstructing
history” which apparently means to him the chronological arrangement and
taxonomic ordering of his units. But one can also view them as exhibiting
examples of differential diffusion and acceptance of culture traits (meaning ideas).
One might make an analysis of what traits were borrowed, what their character
might mean with regard to culture processes, and what meaning hypotheses
developed on these foundations might have for the individual cultural entities
involved.
     Looking over the examples in Colton’s paragraph No. 1, i.e., those that did
not diffuse, two common denominators appear: religion (sipapu, ball court,
burial posture, if we proceed on assumptions current in the Southwest today),
technique of manufacture (method of smoothing pottery, firing atmosphere and
its connected feature: paint color). Respecting axes, lodge shape, and roof
support, we advance with less assurance. It may be that they belong with the
category of technique. But on the other hand it may be that roof support has
religious import as among the Pawnee and that the shape of the lodge has reli-
gious sanctions, as is presumably the case of the Anasazi (Kayenta) house-kiva
complex before about A.D. 1300 (noted by Colton but to another purpose, 1942,
Divo   )s
     When we come to the examples which did diffuse from Kayenta to Sinagua,
i.e., Colton’s paragraph No. 2, something else is seen: they are all practical and
de novo improvements on house form. There were no conflicting practices al-
ready established and, if we argue from the fact of their very obvious efficiency,
the traits were perfectly capable of being taken over without any of the
original religious connotation which they might have had. Of course, the same
reasoning could possibly be used in the case of the ball game: that it could have
been taken over without any religious features; but the mere fact that it was not
diffused may indicate that these features were strong enough to prevent its trans-
mittal or acceptance.
    Here are a series of hypotheses erected on none too plentiful empirical evi-
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              167

dence, yet if they should lead to more intensive studies or if they should come to
be fully accepted, they would have a far-reaching influence on the cultural pic-
ture of the ancient Southwest. For one thing, they would greatly broaden and
strengthen the criteria upon which the Kayenta and Sinagua Branches are
separated. If their religious conservatism was of such a nature as to prevent the
interchange of ideas, then it is a justifiable inference that their religions were
different. If their a alaae were different, it is doubtful whether the two branches
could rightly be thought to represent an ethnic entity which actually existed in
the past. Also assuming the conservatism of motor habits and methods of manu-
facture as opposed to the changeability of end-results, we again find grounds for
segregating the two branches. Or reversing the assumption and admitting their
distinctiveness, we have found evidence to substantiate the conservatism of
methods of manufacture and the mobility of practical and efficient ideas. As
always in any discipline which, iike archeology, progresses by the method of
“successive approximation,” the need is for more data and for more intensive,
yet broader, study upon them.*4#

      Four examples have been presented: two demonstrated how non-material
 traits, even implicit culture, may be derived from archeological data, and two
showed how certain concepts as to the workings of culture may be tested and
given temporal depth. The examples have further indicated that analysis of
archeological data along such lines can be made without having or using a com-
plete cultural context. Immediate context for the cultural segment under investi-
gation is required or at least the material must be handled with regard for its
context whether it is explicitly given or not, but within these limits, almost
any cultural analysis will offer hints and leads for continued study. However,
the method is one of ‘‘successive approximations,” and the acceptance of the re-
sults will depend to a large extent upon the breadth and depth of the context from
which the data have been drawn.
      Thus, in the above pages, two configurations were shown to lie within the
decorating of textile fabrics and the making of cordage as practiced by the ancient
people of Coahuila. But the first was modified by the second and both are expec-
tably subject to modification by other configurations yet to be discovered.
Eventually it will require an analysis of the whole available culture roster
before there will be even a modicum of certainty that further knowledge will
not change the picture. The point here is: a start may be made upon data that
are incomplete, and a definite effort should be made from the beginning to study
the data from a cultural (not merely an empirical) angle, but it is understood
that the results will be in the form of tentative hypotheses and guides to other
lines of investigation and are expected to undergo progressive correction,
although perhaps not radical change, as research proceeds.
 168

                                   E. COMPARATIVE

       Under this heading is included the study of the relationships between cultural
contexts as wholes. Although it may utilize comparisons of elements or cultural
  complexes, its major objective is to place a given synthesis in its proper temporal
_and cultural position with respect to the broad picture of human life in the
_ surrounding territory. At this point in the procedure, interest has gone beyond
   the mere comparison of individual objects and culture traits and is focused on
 ascertaining the connections of cultural entities as manifested at sites, cohesive
 components thereof, and areas.
     These relationships are at the same time cultural and chronological, but for
 the purpose of study and in actual practice they can, and often must, be treated
 separately. It may be possible in one instance to discover the cultural relations
 of a site and not be able to define its temporal position with regard to other
  materials. Similarly it may be possible, through the presence of diagnostic ele-
  ments, relatively or absolutely to date a site, while at the same time it is impos-
  sible to recognize its over-all cultural affiliations. The ideal, of course, is success
  in both directions, but failure along one line need not make for failure along
  the other. There are, in practice, two problems, the solutions of which may be
  separate operations but the results of which are sought for a single purpose,
  the writing of archeological ethnology.)
.      In regard to such comparisons, the conjunctive approach has two tenets: (1)
  that they should be based ey cultural rather than empirical categories} and
  (2) that!‘quantitative analysis 1
                                  as absolutely necessary in order that warpings and
  errors be eliminated as much as possible. This is to say that trait lists, consisting
  of descriptive categories and based on mere presence and absence, have only a
  very limited function in these comparisons.
       As an example, the cave material from the Southwest and northern Mexico
  may again be used. For a long time, the list of similar items to be found in such
  sites (atlatl, grooved club, coiled basketry, sandals, twined bags, etc.) either
 confused and troubled the archeologists or led them to believe that all these mani-
 festations belonged to a single culture which could be given the name Basket-
  Maker.” Although the comprehensiveness of this “culture,” to my knowledge,
  was never defined, it is plain from their writings that many archeologists viewed
  these similarities between the sites, not as the reflection of a basic, broad, and
  ancient connection, but as indicating relationships much closer in both time and
  culture. In one of the most recent instances, R. R. Zingg is most certain in his
  assertion of “Basket-Maker” affiliations for material from Chihuahua, Mexico,
  on the basis of nine such items (1940).
      Although this position is not now held by all Americanists, nevertheless it is
  revealing that it should ever have been held at all, because it demonstrates
  very clearly the pitfalls of basing comparative studies on presence-and-absence
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               169


trait lists and incomplete and unweighted cultural inventories. To quote from
my review of another of Zingg’s papers:
In fact, it appears possible, and even probable, that Lovelock material is not Basket-
maker I or Basketmaker at all, if by Basketmaker we mean Basketmaker II of the
San Juan. The former depicts a littoral, hunting, fishing, and gathering culture quite
apart in economy, in the weighting of its techniques of manufacture, and in its
artifacts from agricultural Basketmaker. To equate these two economies under a
single cultural designation would appear to be misleading, and the disharmony is even
greater when the desert gathering cultures of southeast New Mexico and Texas are
included. If Dr. Zingg had re-analyzed the available cave material, I feel sure that
he would have rejected the current belief that the presence of the atlatl, coiled
basketry, twining technique, curved club, sandals, etc., indicates a cultural identity
with San Juan Basketmaker or any other specific group. These few generic similarities
of rather wide distribution have overshadowed for many years the detailed and very
real differences in cultural materials from cave sites. There has been little or no
consideration of total culture-rosters, and no extensive and determined effort has
been made to weigh the predominance of various traits within, and between, sites
or groups of sites. (Taylor, 1943, pp. 309-310)

Basic to this viewpoint is the axiom stated by Clark Wissler that:
    . we may take it for granted that wherever there are sharp differences in peoples
as to such fundamental necessities as housing, clothing, and feeding, there will like-
wise exist differences in beliefs and ideals, so great and having so much originality
of form, that the whole life complexes of these people must be taken as distinct
cultures. (1923, p. 3)

    Therefore what is necessary is that we compare, not individual items either
separately or in groups, but rather cultural contexts and/or broad cultural com-
plexes as wholes. These entities can be isolated for study only by using cultural
categories as opposed to empirical ones and by employing the rectifying factors
of quantification, each to the extent of their availability. Many individual
items may be expected to have wide distributions and thus to bring about a
leveling of cultural inventories if viewed from a presence-and-absence basis.
But when these items are taken in conjunction with, and in relation to, their
cultural matrix (and quantitative analysis is one of the best means to show
this relationship), they may be expected, and indeed are found (as in the textile
industry example given in Chapter 5 of the present study, pp. 134ff), to show
differences that are locally and comparatively significant. A determination of
the meaning of these differences is not always possible, immediately or ultimately,
but this is no reason for their neglect, and offers, in many cases, a further source
of archeological problem. The investigation and possible solution of such prob-
lems cannot help but enrich the productions of archeological research.
 170

                           D. SYNTHESIS    AND   CONTEXT

      In order to provide the materials for such comparisons as proposed in the
  preceding section, it is obvious that the synthesis of data from individual—
  archeological sites will have to be both cultural and quantitative. There is a
~ place in the procedure of archeological research for empirical, descriptive cate-
 gories, but that place is not here. Headings such as “Artifacts of Wood,” “Arti-
 facts of Stone,” etc., have no place in a cultural context. Ethnographies and his-
 tories are not written by the use of such rubrics, and it is not a quibble to insist
 that the viewpoint expressed by presenting data under the headings “Artifacts
 of Stone” and “Artifacts of Wood” is quite different from that indicated by
 “Exploitation of the Mineral Environment” and “Utilization of Wood.”
      It may be argued that in a great many cases the cultural use, function,
 meaning of an archeologically derived artifact is unknown and even unknowable.
 This is true and will reduce, more or less, the amount and detail of the data
 from which the archeologist can construct his cultural context. But there are
 many ways of viewing and categorizing the cultural materials, and it will be a
 rare find that is not amenable to some analysis, be it from the angle of material
 of manufacture, technique of manufacture, general use such as transportation
  or food or art, etc. By analyzing a puzzling form in one or a number of these
 possible ways, it is very probable that at least some information can be gleaned
  from it, by which the cultural context can be augmented. Perhaps the information
 will not be an aid to an interpretation of its actual use or function, but it should
 be remembered that an artifact is but the end-product of a mental process and
  that it is made of something and by some means. It is assumed that these contin-
  gent factors will have left some mark upon the find, which will be in addition to its
  use. Even use, of whatever sort, probably has left some signs upon the artifact,
  e.g., scratches, smoothed areas, beveled edges. For example, in the Coahuila
  cave CM 68 (Frightful Cave), evidence on the cutting methods, and thus to
  some extent on motor habits also, was obtained from an analysis of a multitude
  of cut twigs and agave stalks whose use, if they were not merely blanks or
  rejects, has not been ascertained. And the implications of the method of twisting
  fiber cordage, the specific use of which was not indicated, have already been
  discussed (pp. 162f above). It is hardly coincidental that a most pertinent
  statement has come from one of the few archeologists who has presented his
  material under broad cultural categories and written what, in effect, is an
 (archeological ethnography |(Clark, 1940). Grahame Clark says:
  Archaeology is often defined as the study of antiquities. A better definition would
  be that it is the study of how men lived in the past .... [the archaeologist] has to
  rely upon circumstantial evidence and much of his time is taken up with details
  which may appear to be trivial, although as clues to human action they can be of
  absorbing interest. (1939, p. 1)
 TAYLOR                        A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             171

     A suggestion may be put forward with a view to aiding the archeologist
 construct a cultural context or at least broaden the base of his thinking and
 research along cultural lines. This is that before, during, and especially after his
 field work he go carefully, heading by heading, through the Outline of Cultural
 Materials     (Murdock et al., 1945) or some other compendium of cultural items,
 e.g., Notes     and Queries   on Anthropology   (Royal   Anthropological   Institute,
 ed. 1929).
     The purpose of such a procedure would be to refresh the archeologist’s
 memory on cultural topics and to awaken him anew to the implications of his
 data. In the field this should result in a sharpened sense of problem and a
 broader envisioning of profitable leads for investigation. But the greatest poten-
 tial advantage would accrue to the laboratory analysis and to the construction
 and writing of a cultural context. With his data at hand, the Outline beside him,
 and starting with heading No. 1, the archeologist asks himself: ‘Are there any of
 my empirical data which could serve as the basis for an inference on this subject?
 Can I orient my way of viewing the material so that I can see light on this topic?
 With respect to the empirical data and general cultural hypotheses, is it likely
  or unlikely that this element was present among the people I am investigating?”
  In addition to helping the archeologist to establish a cultural outlook, such
  compendia will aid him in the construction and actual writing of his context by
  offering him ready-made outlines that are based on cultural categories. It
  devolves upon him to fill in these outlines as best he can, using his empirical data
  and explicit inference.
      Finally, brief mention may be made of another source of inspiration for the
  archeologist who would attempt to write ethnography-of-the-more-distant-past:
  the “universal culture pattern.” Murdock has given a considerable list of items
 “which occur, so far as [the author’s] knowledge goes, in every culture known
_to history or ethnography” (1945, p. 124). If, therefore, we may take it as
  probable that these items occurred in archeological cultures as well, the archeolo-
  gist has been provided with not a few basic assumptions, and it remains for him
  to examine his material to see if he can discover the particular form which these
 generalized “universals” took in his particular culture. About many of them
  he will be unable even to make acceptable inferences, but if his viewpoint is
  thus broadened and the scope of his analyses enlarged, it is to be expected that
  more will be forthcoming than if he should continue to treat his finds as Objects
  of Stone and Objects of Bone and leave it at that. If he accepts Murdock’s
  hypothesis, he knows that these items existed in some form or other, and that
 is half the battle!
      It is possibly gratuitous to remark that the ethnographies of local peoples
 will also serve as guides for the investigation, construction, and presentation of an
 archeological cultural context. Although they are rarely so used, these ethnogra-
172


phies have more value to the archeologist than merely to provide support for
interpretations of the use and function of artifacts or to supply leads as to
cross-cultural relationships.
    But the utilization of cultural categories of itself is not enough. The in-
formation within them must be evaluated, weighed, and given balance by the
use of quantitative and qualitative data and by taking into account the natural
and cultural matrix within which the culture operated. It is of little help to a
cultural context to state, as so often is done, that “among the rubbish in the
cave there occurred many pieces of worn-out and discarded mats” (Kidder
and Guernsey, 1922, p. 98), or that “there are several forms of ax heads”
(Roberts, 1940, p. 119) and then fail to give any figures on the number of forms
recognized or the quantities of specimens in each category. What it is vital to
know is how many pieces of matting there were and of what weaves, the relative
frequency of each ax type and how the category of ax heads (with its quantified
subdivisions) compares with, say, mauls or hoes or cutting tools in general.
For example, it would be important for a cultural interpretation to know
whether a site contained a great number of pottery bowls while at the same time
it was deficient in jar forms. In such circumstances, the archeologist might be
expected to look for storage facilities in other directions, to explain why storage
was not needed, to discover a nearby and constant water supply, etc. Many
problems and interpretations can be derived from equalities or inequalities in
the numbers of such things as basketry trays and bowls, the amount of netting
that could have been used for carrying compared to the number of carrying
baskets, the relative number of ulna and metapodial awls. Bennett has noted
the apparent withdrawal and fortification in Late Middle Mississippi times in the
Mississippi Valley and suggests the possibility of warfare (1943a, pp. 37-38).
Yet to my knowledge there has been no study of the sizes and numbers of
projectile points in order either (a) to help identify the type most prevalent,
assuming a war condition to have existed, or (b) to check on the hypothesis of
warfare, assuming that a small point or some other specific type was used
primarily for fighting. The mere listing of types and their descriptions does not
provide all possible data, or even enough. What is needed is a weighted and
balanced picture (as far as the empirical data will permit), and one method of
obtaining this is by thorough quantitative analysis.
    During the excavation of the Coahuila cave site CM 68, it was decided to
make a count of the fiber quids or “chews” which occur so numerously in the
deposits of most caves but which, to my knowledge, had never been subjected to
analysis.‘ After the count had proceeded for a short time, it became evident
that there were two types of quid present. One seemed to have been chewed
around-and-around in the mouth, giving it the appearance of a wad of chewing
gum. The other had been merely gnawed as one would bite the leaf of an arti-
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             173

choke, i.e., by squeezing, sucking, and chewing one end while retaining the other
end in the hand. It was then decided to continue the count, using these two
types as a basis of distinction. In all, somewhat over 20,600 quids were typed,
counted, and their frequencies plotted according to horizontal and vertical strat-
blocks within the cave. The graph resulting from this manipulation showed a
startling and definite modality. Although the gum-chewed quids exhibited a
considerable numerical superiority in the total count and in the great majority
of blocks, there were blocks in which the artichoke-chewed quids approached
parity with the round type and even surpassed it in some cases. By plotting the
percentage of round to long quids for each block, a definite bimodal curve ap-
peared: there were two distinct peaks showing the greater frequency of the long
artichoke-chewed type. This was an empirical fact, and possible correlations were
sought for it.
     It was found that the peak frequencies of the long type were spatially corre-
lated with the two major fire-rock areas within the cave, or rather that they
were just to the inward side of the cave from these cooking areas. Here again
was an empirical fact; it remained to be explained by inference. The most satis-
factory interpretation which has been projected to date suggests that the former
inhabitants, when their feast of agave or sotol was baked and ready for eating,
clustered around the opened rock oven-pit and grabbed leaf after leaf to extract
just the “cream” from each, tossing them quickly away to grab another. When,
however, they went away from the source of supply or when the urgency of a
community and somewhat competitive repast was not upon them, they chewed
their quids around-and-around to extract every bit of sweet nourishment con-
tained therein, spitting out the spent quids generally over the whole length
and breadth of the cave.
    The analysis might end here, or it might go on. There are implications of
hunger in the picture thus drawn. Are there other signs in the culture of a
marginal subsistence? The fecal specimens found throughout the site, although
they have not yet been reported upon by competent authority, seem to contain a
superabundance of woody and coarse fibrous materials, possibly indicating a
starvation diet mainly dependent upon vegetal foods. On the other hand, for
people willing to subsist on agave, sotol, lechuguilla, and other such plants,
there would seem to have been no lack of food. But the availability of nourish-
ment from these plants seems to be seasonal (at least in the present day and with
modern tastes), and this fact might give a clue to the problem. In any event, the
leads given by this one quantitative study and the cultural and geographical
researches thus called forth are ample evidence that presence-and-absence lists
do not exhaust the potentialities of even the simplest archeological data. The
cultural conjunctives within a site are a vast source of problem as yet hardly
tapped by those whose concern is with relationships ovtside the site.
174


    Another analytical attack is from the standpoint of quality. This is not an
empirical criterion like quantity, but so long as the archeologist is explicit as to
the standards he sets up, there is nothing to prevent its use. To take an example
from ethnography and one which could receive investigations and testing in the
archeological field, the question may be asked whether it is a function of the
group’s interest or some configuration of their culture that the Navaho have
assimilated and improved upon Pueblo weaving, while they have made a very
poor showing indeed at the art of pottery decoration. If Reichard’s suggestions
are correct, the Navaho entered the Southwest with a knowledge of both weaving
and ceramics (1936, pp. 162-177), but Navaho weaving in its recorded form is
undoubtedly of Pueblo inspiration in the great majority of its features, as
Reichard very clearly shows, and the painted decoration of Navaho pottery seems
also to be due to Pueblo influence. In these circumstances, then, the differential
emphasis, integration, and excellence of the two techniques among the Navaho
are all the more significant.
    Likewise, if from an archeological site (in Coahuila this is somewhat the case)
the artifacts of wood and fiber show a considerable degree of craftsmanship
while stone work is unelaborated, even crude, does not this fact have a bearing
on the cultural picture to be derived and also, indeed, upon the comparisons to
be made between sites and areas?
    And what about conjunctives between the people and their environment?
To what extent do artifacts and other cultural items represent the full range of
possibilities offered by the natural surroundings? Are there plant and afimal
forms identifiable as having lived at the time of occupation but which are not
found to have been culturally utilized at the sites? How much of the empirical
data along these lines appears attributable to the vagaries of preservation and
excavation and how much to actual bygone conditions? (This is a problem to
face, not one to dodge by bemoaning the inadequacy of the archeological record.)
How do the potential and actual utilizations of the mineral resources compare?
Did the people go distances for a substance, a like or substitute form of which
existed in the neighborhood? Along the latter lines, the results and implications
of Anna Shepard’s work on Rio Grande and La Plata pottery shows what can
be done (1936, 1939, 1942).
     An example may be cited from Coahuila. Plate 3 gives the vertical and
horizontal distributions of a land snail and of pifion nuts in Frightful Cave.”
Humboldtiana is a rare form and has been found in the higher, more moist
regions of the Sierra Madre of Mexico under conditions quite different from
those prevailing in the Coahuila desert today (Pilsbry, 1939, pp. 397-398)        18
The evidence from snails, then, indicates the presence of a form which was
disappearing because of increasing aridity in the region. The presence of pifion,
on the other hand, seems to require another interpretation. These trees are
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               WE

 found today only on the tops of the higher, and therefore more moist, moun-
 tains.‘*? Here is a case of a life form, which requires more moist and cooler
 conditions than exist today in the vicinity of the cave but which increases, rather
 than decreases, its representation in the deposits from bottom to top.
      Taking these data and having other evidence for a growing aridity in the
 Coahuila desert, it seems that the upward decrease of Humboldtiana is a function
 of this climatic shift. But the increase of pifion cannot be accounted for on this
 basis, since it directly contradicts the assumption of increasing dryness. If not
 controlled by the environmental factor, it seems that the utilization of pifion in
 the upper levels of Frightful Cave is a cultural phenomenon. Surely if it were
 present and used for food in the drier and later stages, it must have been present
 in the earlier and more moist stages but was not used for food by the people.
 Here, then, is an instance of failure to make full use of the environment.


  part of constructing a cultural context. Under this heading would come the
) sequential development) of a pueblo structure, a mound, a village site, or the
  deposits within a cave. The fact that a people were accustomed to strew fiber
  rubbish around their cave dwelling or to make definite occupation levels in an
  open village by the importation of clay for flooring is as much the result of
  cultural behavior as is the shape of a stone ax. While such factors may be of
  little importance for direct comparison with other sites, they nevertheless consti-
  tute basic and important information on the life at the particular site in question.
  The growth of a pueblo structure is as much a part of the cultural picture as the
  forms of metate or the number of pottery bowls—in fact it would appear to be
  more basic and not the secondary, by-the-way evidence which it seems to be in
  most reports of Americanist archeology.
       An example of what may be done along these lines will be offered here.
  Indulgence must be asked for it, however, because of several factors which
  contribute to make it far from an ideal one: both excavation and analysis were
  made before the ideas comprising the conjunctive approach had taken definite
  form; the excavation was not completed; the work was done by students under
  supervision which was not as close as it might have been, due to other duties
  having call upon my attention. Nevertheless it does indicate the potentialities,
  if not the utmost success, to be expected. It consists of the interpretation of the
  growth of two pueblo rooms in site Bc 51 in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico.‘
 Plate 4 will illustrate the text.
     The construction of Room 26 began by the excavation of its floor space some
 2 feet 3 inches below the then surface. Evidence from Rooms 28 and 24b indi-
 cate that there was an extensive excavation providing space for several rooms
 (the implications of this fact for group or family activity would possibly be
176


clarified by examination of other data such as artifact styles, fragments of
single vessels found in several rooms, etc.). This excavation cut at an angle
through a top, culturally sterile, wind- and/or water-laid sandy stratum and into
a cultural fill lying in what appears to have been an old pit structure. Floor
excavation went to, or a little into, the blue-yellow clay of the native earth.
    The construction of the east wall was begun with only one course of masonry
as a facing against the excavation but was increased outward to two courses some
16 inches above floor level.      This was probably controlled by the angle of the
original foundation excavation which, in turn, was a function of the use of dig-
ging sticks. With the use of such instruments, the sides of a pit are more apt to
be sloping than straight. The east and south walls were built as one job, the
former abutting the south wall of Room 24b and the latter the west wall which
serves both Room 24b and Room 26. Thus Room 26 was built after the former.
     With the exception of the north, the walls were built very high, yet there are
no indications of vigas or other roof construction in them. From this it might be
inferred that, after abandonment and some filling, the walls had been re-worked
and extended upward, covering beam-holes and other evidence. But despite evi-
dence for the reuse of the area (see below), there is no definite sign that the
walls were ever re-worked. Perhaps the ceiling was actually over 9 feet high. The
walls were plastered to a thickness of about one-half an inch, but no layer
count was made.
     The floor showed no trace of a fire-pit, nor was there any burned area to
indicate that fires might have been made in the room. Pit A was apparently lined
with thin plaster, and 3 inches from its bottom it contained a turquoise inlay
pendant. Pits B, C, D, and E were well plastered and well executed as to shape.
Pit E served as a pot-rest and contained a large corrugated jar fitted with a
stone pot-lid. The locations of a Gallup Black-on-white bowl and another corru-
gated jar correspond to the location of Pits B and C respectively, which were
probably pot-rests also.
    The abandonment of Room 26 seems to have been caused directly, or was
at least hurried, by the buckling of the north and west walls. The final northward
collapse of the former was probably the final consideration. This wall not only
collapsed and split in the center but also pulled away from its junction with the
east wall as much as 10 inches at the top. That this happened before abandon-
ment, or at least before any appreciable fill had accumulated, is suggested by
the absence of local down-dropping in the fill of Room 26.
     With abandonment, Room 26 began to fill with debris. At first, culturally
sterile sand blew in or was washed in and covered the floor. Then cultural ma-
terial began to be deposited over a considerable area of the room. The amount
of adobe clods and rock, which might indicate roofing materials, was very small
and confined almost entirely to the north end. No evidence of any roof supports
                                                                               TAYLOR   PLATE    3




                                                           o| %|bk]%


                            PINON

                                                          RAE)




                        HUMBOL DTIANA_

                                                 Bottom |23 6423]
                                                  TOTAL   |36|   |36

Distribution   of Humboldtiana   and pifon shells in Frightful Cave, CM   68, Coahuila, Mexico

     This chart depicts three-dimensional distribution. The vertical depths are indicated
vertically in centimeters. The horizontal meter-blocks from front to back of the cave are
represented from left to right by the numbered sections between double-dotted lines. The
horizontal meter-blocks from the center of the deposits to the west wall of the cave are
represented from left to right by the single-dotted subdivisions within each numbered section.
     In the summary tables, the numbers of specimens and blocks are identical because the
data were gathered only on a presence-and-absence basis according to stratigraphic blocks. On
the other hand, specimen percentages are figured according to total presences listed, while
block percentages are figured according to the maximum possible blocks within the respective
stratigraphic levels.
     The lack of specimens from the front of the cave is only apparent. This is due to the
fact that tabulation of these types was not begun before Line 14.
                                                                       TAYLOR   PLATE   4




                                                          L4a




         So:                                                          NV.
                                        (b)
a) Plan of the south-central portion of Bc 51, Chaco Canyon, New
                                                                 Mexico (schematic)
       b) Section through Rooms 24 and 26, Bc 51, Chaco Canyon, New
                                                                       Mexico
                          (vertical exaggeration is three times)
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              177


larger than finger-sized impressions in clods was found. The cultural fill, com-
posed of ash, sand, sherds, artifacts, as a loose and unconsolidated mass, banked
up against the south wall to a height of 5 feet. It appears that the angle of
repose controlled the amount of deposition and, when the angle became too steep,
increments slid downward and northward. The result has been that the fill of
the north end was found to be either horizontal or dipping slightly back toward
the south. These facts indicate that the deposition was cumulative and not the
result of short-term, purposeful action. But before the north end filled to more
than ,2 feet above the floor, a dump of almost pure sand, containing relatively
little cultural material, was thrown in, obviously for the purpose of leveling off
the partially filled room.
     At the top of this dump were found several features which further sub-
stantiate the hypothesis of intentional fill by giving a reason for its deposition.
A stone-sided fireplace and a corrugated jar set in stone slabs and covered with
a pot-lid were found at what had evidently been two separate levels of occupation
upon the room-fill. The top of the fire-pit was on a level with the floors of Rooms
24 and 24x, and the pot-lid was even with the floor of Room 24a. Roofing ma-
terial on the upper portions of the fill of Room 26 and below the south wall of
Rooms 24 and 24x indicates that the destruction of the roof of Room 24a was
effected after the use of the slabbed jar and before the construction of both the
fill fire-pit and the south wall of Rooms 24 and 24x. These correlations lead to
the conclusion that the area of Room 26 (abandoned and filled) served as an
open-air adjunct first of Room 24a (slabbed jar) and then to either or both
Rooms 24 and 24x (fire-pit). The south wall of Rooms 24 and 24x was built out
over the fill of Room 26.
     Above the level of the fill fire-pit, the deposits at the time of excavation
showed much re-working and disturbance. Aside from the obvious slope wash of
later years, there is nothing that could be determined concerning them. There
is no evidence of any superstructure on this room.
     Turning to Room 24, it is found that within the horizontal area designated
by this number on the original survey of the site, there were actually four rooms
on three levels. The lowest of these, Room 24b, had not been completely exca-
vated when this analysis was undertaken, and the information from it is less
complete than from Room 26 and the other Rooms 24. Nevertheless, its career
can be outlined with a reasonable enough fullness to permit its inclusion to
round out the picture.
     The floor of Room 24b was laid in the same excavation as that of Room 26.
The floors of the two were made as one continuous piece of construction separated
only by a low, rounded clay sill which also served as the foundation for the
party wall between the rooms. The floor of Room 24b was slightly lower than
that of Room   26 due to the dip of the native earth which acted as the base of
178


room excavation; the same control influenced the floor level of Rooms 28
and 29.
    Three walls of Room 24b were constructed clockwise from the northwest
corner, while the west wall was carried directly south from that point. The
south wall was finished off by an abutment against the west. This latter was not
ended here but was continued southward without a break for two more rooms.
Rooms 24b, 26, and the unnumbered one immediately south of the latter were,
thus, all part of a single sequential construction, starting at the north end.
      Both the west and north walls of Room 24b were found to be in poor
condition, bulging inward at precarious angles. The west one was plastered and
then chinked with stone spalls through the plaster. Sherds were set vertically as
chinking in the angle of the northwest corner. Due to incomplete excavation,
the floor features are not sufficiently known to be discussed. The abandonment
of Room 24b was caused, or hurried, by the imminent collapse of the south, west,
and north walls. Possibly the south one actually sagged before the room was
entirely deserted. But the increased dip in the fill near the wall indicates that
the party wall did not completely give way until some time after abandonment.
The first deposits in the deserted room were laminated sands. Upon these were
found several metates surrounded and covered by adobe clods and other evi-
dence of roof material. It seems, therefore, that the roof held for some time
and that it eventually fell or was torn down, causing the metates to fall together
with the roof debris. The impressions of wood found in the clods are not large,
and once more there is no evidence of beams having been set in the walls. In
view of the obvious re-workings and superposition of the rooms, such beam holes
might have been obliterated, but the similar conditions of Room 26 throw doubt
upon this interpretation. As the fill was building up, many manos became in-
 corporated in it, suggesting that it might have served as a depository for the
 refuse from some nearby working area. The horizontal bedding of most of the
 fill may indicate purposeful action of relatively short duration, but at least two
layers were definitely deposited as a single action: shale and yellow sand were
 brought in and dumped for the purpose of leveling the room area preparatory to
 laying the floor of Room 24a.
      Over the fill of Room 24b and on top of the prepared layers, a clay floor was
 laid within the limits of the still-standing walls of the old room area. A stone-
 sided fire-pit was constructed in the center of this Room 24a merely by digging
 a pit through the finished floor and into the soft fill beneath. The floor was also
 plastered—at least six times during the occupancy of the room. In order to com-
 plete the rectangle of the new room, a piece of wall had to be built to replace the
 badly bulged and collapsed segment of the old south, party wall. The new piece
was dove-tailed into the eastern portion which was still standing, and in order
to make a straight line and a rectangular room it was built out over the fill of
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             179

Room 26, which deposits had bulged into the area of Room 24b with the sagging
of the party wall. There was evidence of a door at the west end of this new
segment of wall, and, if this fact could have been more firmly established by
excavation, it would have lent a good deal of support to the hypothesis of an
outdoor occupation level containing a slabbed jar, lying on the fill of Room 26,
and connected with the occupation of Room 24a. The height of the walls of
this room is unknown since their upper parts were destroyed with succeeding
renovations.
“ At some time after the floor was laid and after one or more plasterings, the
threatened collapse of the west wall prompted the occupants of Room 24a to
erect a support. Two buttresses 18 inches high were built against it. The south
one was made of adobe with an occasional sherd, pebble, or twig; it blocked what
may have been the door to the fill occupation-level over Room 26; this opening,
door or otherwise, was closed by a thin stone facing on the indoor side. The
north buttress was of similar composition but was faced with one whole and
one fragmentary metate. The buttresses were not tied into the wall and are now
found to be separated from it by distances up to two inches at all points. After
these features were in place, occupation continued for a time, and the occupants
kept on plastering their floor—but not beneath the buttresses.
     Eventually, however, Room 24a was deserted. This may have been due to
an increase in the danger from the west wall, although it seems rather unlikely in
view of the buttresses. It was more probably due to some trouble with the north
wall, which was ultimately torn down to the floor, while the three others were
demolished only to the height of the buttresses. The room was filled to the latter
level with the resulting debris. The floor of the next room, Room 24x, was laid
directly upon this fill.
    The demolition and filling of Room 24a and the construction of Rooms 21
and 24x were connected operations. The south wall of Room 21, which was to be
the party wall between it and Room 24x, was built before the filling of the old
Room 24a and served to hold back the fill and permit the lenses of debris to
lie horizontally. But the construction of this and the east and west walls of
Room 24x was a single piece of work without breaks or abutments. On the
other hand, the east and west walls were built after the party wall since they
were placed over the fill which the party wall retained in horizontal position and
over the buttresses and wall-stubs forming the western limits of Room 24a.
The walls of Room 24x, the south wall of Room 21 (but not its other walls, a
fact which throws light on the contemporaneity of various masonry types in
Chaco Canyon), and the bracing wall built inside the neighboring Room 23 are
all of the same excellent workmanship and stand in contrast to the poor, weak
walls of Rooms 26, 24b, and 24a. Probably all of them were laid up at the same
time and to remedy the same condition: the buckling of the walls inherited from
180


Room 24b. On the west side of the party wall between Rooms 24x and 21, a
window with a sill joined the two apartments.
     The destruction and abandonment of Room 24x was caused by the build-
ing of Kiva 1. This operation disrupted part of the east wall and part of the
floor. The occupants were forced to move their east wall farther westward and
thus reduce the size of their room. In making this new and smaller Room 24,
they not only changed the east wall but also erected a facing against the party
wall shared with Room 21. This facing consisted of a wall in the better-style
masonry about 4 inches south of the old wall, and the intervening space was filled
with rock and adobe rubble. At this time or possibly earlier, the connecting
window was blocked with masonry. The space between the new east wall and
Kiva 1 was filled with debris from the old east wall. After the final abandonment,
Room 24 filled with its own detritus.
  / The above example has been an interpretation (not the raw data) of building
operations only. It has made no attempt, except for two parenthetical remarks, to
go into the broader implications or to bring to bear the weight of other finds
associated with and within the rooms. Nevertheless, I believe that the potentiali-
ties should be perfectly obvious. Combine such studies with the other cultural and
natural data, with similar analyses of other rooms, with interpretations of the
relationships and affinities of all these factors, and there will result a picture of
the site and the life of its people that is historiography every bit as much
as a report on a living group or a documented society At may not be as complete
or as sure in certain aspects, but these differences are of degree and not of kind.
Archeology can “do” historiography, can construct cultural contexts, but not
when it is concerned only with data that are of immediate comparative signifi-
cance outside the site.
     It is also true that, should the archeologist come to view his sites as units
which contained people with a past and a cultural context to be investigated,
then extra-local comparison itself will be better grounded, and a wealth of
problems, interpretive and descriptive, will develop to inspire new research.
According to the conjunctive approach, the first and most important task is the
construction of this context. As has been very clear from the above examples,
extra-local comparisons are vital means to this end, but until the cultural picture
has been developed from the latent image in the ground by the use of interpre-
tation and all the data, they will remain just that: means, not ends. If the
conjunctive approach is to come up for trial, it must rest its case on the primacy
of the cultural context, first of components and sites and then of areas, “culture
areas,” temporal groupings, or whatever. What does it gain us to know that one
 culture came after another and was in some way related, if we know little or
 nothing of either culture as it existed in the past among the people to whom it
 belonged?
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             181

                                c(LOCAL CHRONOLOGY|
      Since the chronological relations of one cultural context to another have
                                                     I
  already been taken up under the heading E. Comparative, the purpose of the
  present section is to provide for the analysis of chronological relationships within
__a single site. This step is important whether ‘the site prove to contain(one or _
 _several cultural entities] In the first instance, the development and change
   through time exhibited by a single component will be one of its most important
 __aspects, culturally speaking. In the second, a time differential may be one of the
  _important diagnostic features belonging to different components and, once
   established, will aid in the interpretation of the separate contexts Enemies and
  their interrelationships, if any.
        The analysis of room sequence in the Chaco Canyon site Bc 51 given above
   will serve as an example of what information is sought under this heading. The
   various building periods of a pueblo are crucial to an understanding of the
   structure as a whole and of the life that was led in it. The temporal relationships
   of varying pottery styles, of a mound to a nearby village, of obviously distinct
   complexes within a midden or shellheap are complicated problems in themselves,
   and their solutions, although they may be aided by comparative material from
   outside, are primarily to be attacked from within, from data found at the site
   itself. For this reason, local chronology has been given a separate heading in
   this outline of the conjunctive approach.
                                        B. DATA
     What is asked by the conjunctive approach with regard to the collection and
  study of the data should be apparent from the foregoing summaries of chro-
  nology, synthesis, and comparison. Therefore the contents of the following pages
  are to be construed as leads and suggestions. They are intended to give an idea
  of the sort of information sought, not to outline or define the range of desirable
  data.
                                    1. COLLECTION
                                   a. Local cultural

      The cultural material of a site, all of it, is included under this heading. In
   many cases, the artifacts, the cultural refuse, and the deposits will be difficult,
   if not impossible, to distinguish as separate categories. This is to be expected
   and in no way affects the break-down, which has been made for the sake of
   clarity and description and with a view to aiding the visualization of what kinds
   of data may be collected.
       Two generalized ideals may be stated with reference to the/‘collection! of
cultural data. The first is that excavation and recording produce more_satis-
_ factory results when executed according to the units by which the deposits were
_ formed, i.e., by occupation levels, by refuse layers, by periods of construction,
 182


_ by periods of natural deposition, etc. The placing of finds in relation to some
_ arbitrary, stratigraphic system causes the loss of much important, even vital,
  information. Many of the more significant associations of the material will be
  lost or badly obscured if left to be extracted from the assemblages of gross and
  often culturally unrelated blocks in a stratigraphic grid. In other words, that
deus ex machina, the stratigraphic method, if used mechanically and alone, will
  fail to provide the detail necessary to construct the fullest possible cultural
  context. It is realized, of course, that this ideal will meet with many practical
  obstacles. But as a mark to be aimed and shot at, it constitutes one of the
  tenets of the conjunctive approach.
       The second is that all cultural materials, i.e., all phenomena that were used,
  made, modified, or possessed by the human beings under investigation, directly or
  Halnyeie consciously or unconsciously, should be preserved for study or fully
  recorded in the field when preservation. is unwarranted or impossible. By_thi this
 procedure alone can there be achieved acceptable distribution studies, quantita-
__tive analysis, and weighting of segments within the cultural whole represented
 _by.the site or component. Here again, practicality will often and drastically alter
   the ideal which, nevertheless, has its important function and deserves to be
  kept well in mind, to be adhered to as closely as practically possible.
       1. Artifacts: An artifact may be defined as any material construct made or
  modified by the conscious agency of man. Dwellings as well as ax blades, picto-
   graphs and temple mounds, bedrock mortars and furrowed fields are artifacts.
 _ The relation of an artifact to a culture trait is that of the material objectification
  of a mental concept. It follows, therefore, that a fragmentary artifact represents
  a trait as much as does a whole specimen and should receive similar treatment
  and weighting. In other words, matting fragments represent the same culture
  trait as complete mats and should be preserved or recorded equally. This does
  not mean, of course, that fragments are to be counted as wholes. The significance
  of fragments for the context is a problem to be solved in terms of the actual
  conditions at the site, not hypothetical or generalized ones. But the fact that
  detailed and complete information often may not be forthcoming from a frag-
  mentary artifact does not alter the cultural factor. In fact, its very fragmentary
  nature may be indicative of a culture trait not present in the complete object.
  The cultural interpretation of whole and partial specimens may be different,
  complementary, or overlapping, but nonetheless both represent culture traits and
  are grist to the archeologist’s mill.
       2. Cultural Refuse: Cultural refuse may be defined as the debris or residuum
  from the cultural activities of man. Included in this category would be such
  things as food refuse, the detritus from the manufacture of artifacts, the fire-
  fractured rocks from a pit-oven, etc. Even the fecal specimens that are often
   found in sheltered sites may be considered here, representing as they do the
  dietary residue. Once more, complete recovery and recording is the ideal, but
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              183

  here there is even less chance of attainment than with respect to artifacts. In
  certain midden and cave sites, the very mass of refuse is so tremendous that full
  recovery is entirely out of the question. As a bow to expediency in such cases, it
  is suggested that if presence or absence is noted for the whole site or an
  acceptably large portion and according to reasonably small units of deposit, a
  satisfactory and representative sample will be obtained. This system is based on
  the assumption that the relative proportions of the forms in question will be
  reflected areally as well as quantitatively, but an analysis will have to be made
  for individual sites to ascertain the validity of this generalization in each case.
  Such analysis is one of the tasks to be handled under the sub-heading Criticism
  in the section on Study (see p. 193).
       But this concession to practicality may be overworked to the detriment of
  the context. Much information that is often discarded may be saved for study
  if its value is recognized and an effort made to lighten the burden of preserving
  it. Specimens that can be identified may be tabulated in the field for each unit of
  excavation, either on a presence-and-absence basis or by some relative designa-
  tion such as “abundant” or “scarce.” Unidentified specimens which, however,
  can be typed, may be similarly treated and several examples saved for future
  identification. All untyped and unidentified specimens should be retained, and
  they will probably not amount to a number too great to handle. In the excava-
  tion of Frightful Cave, for instance, although working with the bare minimum
  of a crew, it was possible to make presence-and-absence charts throughout the
  site for the more common vegetal forms and to save the less common and
  untypable ones, while at the same time every identifiable animal bone was
  saved and the unidentifiable ones recorded as “small, medium, or large.” The
  value of these records is demonstrated, among others, by the examples of snails,
  pinons, and fiber quids given above.
       3. Deposits: Here may be included such information as the details of mound
  structure, the manner in which cave deposits were built, the nature of fill in a
  pueblo room, etc.—in other words, the character of what above was called the
  “cultural matrix.” The formation of deposits within an abandoned room in a
  pueblo carries cultural implications over and beyond the fact that the deposits
  are the resting place for a certain number of artifacts. The cited example of site
  Bc 51, Chaco Canyon, should be ample argument, e.g., the nature of the fill
  indicated intentional leveling for an outdoor occupation area and also sug-
  gested the relative time of abandonment of certain rooms, thus helping to round
  out the cultural picture by the addition of temporal factors.

                              b. Local Human     Biological
       Three sets of data may be included under this heading: the! physical attri-
—
   butes lof the people under investigation, their ‘mortuary customs, and the cultural
  implications of these characteristics for other categories of the cultural whole.
 184


 The first requires either competency on the part of the archeologist or the
 services of a physical anthropologist.   The second would seem to be obvious, yet
 it is often a much neglected topic. For example, in three of the most recent and
 compendious of publications on Mississippi Valley archeology (Griffin, 1943;
 Ritchie, 1944; Webb and Snow, 1945), there is almost no information to be
 gained as to what cultural objects were found with what burials. Usually the
 orientation, the body posture, the sex or age (if identifiable), and the presence or
 absence of “grave goods” are noted. These aspects seem to have comparative
 significance as criteria of units in the McKern classification and are therefore
 given. But one looks in vain in the vast majority of cases for descriptions of the
 actual artifacts found in the graves. In the Ritchie citation, for instance, grave
 goods are listed by type in the photographs of certain burials, but in the text the
 contents of specific graves are not given except incidentally. In other words, the
 attempt has not been consistently made to’associate the sex, age, physical attri-
 butes and pathology, posture, orientation, location, and associated cultural ma-
 terial in all possible examples. /
    With regard to the cultural implications of such data, even less is usually
 given. For example, Webb says:
 Burial practices and the resultant traits which point to them may thus be conceived
 as the social act of the body politic, in contrast to, for example, the manufacture
 of a particular type of artifact. ... (Webb and Snow, 1945, p. 167)

 If this is true, and if Webb and his colleagues were actually interested in
 depicting the life of the social entities that lived in their areas in the past, it
 seems impossible that they would not have made a more concious effort to
 give the complete picture of burials as found. The cat is let out of the bag,
 however, when on the next page Webb says:
 | If this be true [that burial customs change more slowly than the material aspects of
/ culture], similar burial traits should be of prime importance in establishing close
‘ connections between peoples. .. . (p. 168)

 Obviously, his interest in the “social act of the body politic” was not for the
 purpose of understanding the culture of that body, but for comparative purposes
 outside the site.
     But there are other ways of looking at the data. Why have there not been
 studies of the burial offerings associated with individuals of a given age or sex?
 Is it not worthy of further thought that a seventeen-year-old girl was buried with
 a large celt in addition to some six other artifacts (Lewis, 1943, p. 310)? Like-
 wise, Ritchie finds a female buried with a harpoon (1944, p. 282). These facts
 lead the inquiring archeologist to ask: If the grave goods belonged to the de-
 ceased, what do they imply; if they did not belong to the deceased but were
 donated by others, what are the implications? The need is obviously for more
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             185

information in order to tell whether these instances are atypical or of common
occurrence. Comparative data are called for, not for classificatory purposes alone,
but also so that the cultural significance of such finds may be clarified by evi-
dence from several sources. In another place, Ritchie makes the observation that,
although previously they had been rare, “beginning with the earliest [European]
contact, grave goods were lavished upon the dead” in Iroquois sites (1944, p. 26
fn. 1). Proceeding from the knowledge of the importance of women among the
Iroquois at least in post-contact times, it would be interesting to know whether
the abundance of grave goods had any correlation with the sex of the person
interred. Furthermore, many physical characteristics have cultural factors and
connotations as well, e.g., knife marks on skulls indicating scalping, death rates
and pathology indicating war and dietary deficiencies, the possibility that an
analysis of fecal specimens may shed light upon diet, season of occupation, as
well as the biological attributes of metabolism and endo-parasites.
    In short, if the physical remains are looked upon as bearing in themselves
and their associations the evidences of cultural activities, capable of variation
and indicative of other cultural features, they can be studied with profit to one
interested in the cultural context. It is assumed, as in other phases, that the
burial complex was more or less integrated within the general culture and will
therefore not be an isolated phenomenon divorced from other cultural complexes.
If this assumption is conceded, then it follows that the burial complex will have
implications for those other aspects with which it was integrated. Similarly,
granting that culture has an effect upon physical constitution and biological
functioning, it follows that, whether they can be recognized or not, there must be
reflections of cultural lifein the physical characteristics of a people. It remains
to see whether or not they can be acceptably demonstrated from archeological
data. The challenge is there to be met.

                        c. Contemporaneous Geographical
     In order properly to evaluate a given culture,/t is necessary to know what
possibilities were offered it by the geographic as well as by the cultural environ-
ment/ Until there is some idea as to the potentialities of the natural surround-
ee it is very difficult to understand just how culturally significant a certain
trait really is. For example, it will make considerable difference in the analysis
of a culture if it is found that clay was present and not used for pottery, that
clay was not available, or that clay was not available in the vicinity but was
brought from a distance for use. Shepard’s work on the pottery of Pecos
(Shepard, 1936) is an outstanding instance. Before she demonstrated that certain
pottery types had been constructed of clay not native to the Pecos valley, it
had been assumed that these vessels were the products of local potters. When
it became apparent that they must have been made in another area or that their
186


ingredients must have come from a distance, the cultural meaning of the vessels
changed. The implications for inter-pueblo relations, for industry, for culture
conservatism, and many other facets had gone unrecognized because of a lack of
information on the potentialities of the geographic region.
    Similarly, before it was established that edible fish were native to the salines
and marshes of the Cuatro Cienegas region of Coahuila, the absence of fish
bones (with the exception of one artifact) from the deposits of nearby caves was
regarded as an environmental deficiency. But when fish were found to have
existed in those waters at the time of the first Spanish entrada, and when cultural
comparison showed that the Coahuila culture without fish remains is compara-
ble to the Pecos River cave-dweller material which includes fish remains, the
meaning of the data changed. It can no longer be assumed that the lack of fish
bones is due to environmental causes. In fact, it becomes highly Saas that
this condition is attributable to cultural factors.
    The extent to which a society utilizes its natural surroundings is one of its
most particular and significant aspects. But utilization means more than merely
that which concerns the subsistence economy or material items. It also means
the degree to which the environment enters into the ideas and other non-material
aspects of the cultural picture. A quotation from A. I. Hallowell may be given
at some length because it so well expresses this point:
Man’s   psychological   responses   to the physical   objects   of his external   environment
can only be understood . . . in terms of the traditional meanings which these latter
have for him. He never views the outer world freshly or responds to his fellows
entirely free from the influences which these meanings exert upon his thought and
conduct. /Celestial and meteorological phenomena, for example, or the plants and
 animals of man’s habitat, even its inanimate forms, are never separated as such from
 the concepts of their essential nature and the beliefs about them that appear in the
ideological tradition of a particular cultural heritage. Man’s attitude toward them is —
 a function of reality as culturally defined, not in terms of their mere physical existence.,
 Thus, to treat the physical environment in which a people lives independently of
 the meaning that its multiform objects have for the people involves a fundamental
Psychological distortion if we aim to comprehend the universe which is actually theirs.
‘While useful in certain kinds of analysis, even the assertion that two peoples occupy
 the same natural environment because the regions inhabited by them exhibit the
 same climatic type, the same topography and biota can only have significance in
 the grossest physical sense/ It is tantamount to ignoring the very data which have the
 most important psychological significance, namely the differences in meaning which
 similar objects of the phenomenal world have for peoples of different cultural tradi-
 tions. Consequently, the objects of the external world, as meaningfully defined in
 a traditional ideology, constitute the reality to which the individuals habituated to
 a particular system of beliefs actually respond. As applied to the sphere of ecological
 relations, for example, an inventory of all the natural resources of a specific human
 habitat does not necessarily correspond to the “natural resources” of that habitat.
 TAYLOR                               A STUDY          OF ARCHEOLOGY                                        187

[The physical objects of the environment only enter the reality-order of the human
 population as a function of specific culture patterns. It is the knowledge and techno-
 logical level of the culture of a people that determines their natural resources, not
 the mere presence of physical objects. To people without a tradition of pottery
 making the presence of clay in their habitat is no more a natural resource than
 was the presence of coal and iron in the habitat of the pre-Columbian Indians of eastern
 North America. (1935, pp. 20-21)

     A series of data which, in my estimation, has been inconceivably neglected
 by the students of Americanist archeology is to be found very pertinent to this
 point. I speak of the life-forms depicted upon the pottery bowls of the Mimbres
 region in southern New Mexico. These forms certainly reflect an interest in the
 natural and human environment, but here the question of significance is: an
 interest in what aspects of this environment? A tabulation of some published
 life-forms reveals the following data:
                                                       TABLE   6

    EEUIIIATA Sine taco. ents ea hoketeic ws      65               Partots teretereise cy               6
    1 Cal4aig0 och ne            ee ee            53               Snakes peri       a. ter eee         2
    FS eee ae dara tcl a ies,                     50               Snails.       crane abe.             1
    IMSECUStmem    cept sacesieia vocals eae      30               SCORPIONS era erie Cece              1
    BGO Carer ero,                 ae ee he       24
    Mountain sheep.e. ++...                       21                              SUMMARY
    daNfal(2)Fo)oY aceWeer aa                     20               Birds tela       oe See     ee      96
    pIrtleshiemes seins te seen                   19               EtUumianss jt eee          ee       65
    Swallow-like birds..........                  17               Deer, sheep, antelope.......        57
    Gamivores ark teeins. saci                    16               FS Hyayctg hectic ene che eetay:    50
    IDGEr Shi)    hainigenitien orstaysled Hang   16               INSECTS ued nya hema heer ene       30
    rk 67s werecard              kocher           14               Hrogsrand liZarcSentssetameie       26
    BirogS eer. :eee cht See bce                  13               ISS ofyh Oepa Okay LReomheoauer
                                                                                                 ees   24
    TEIZaTO Sivan  erereeieyee   ee eaters        13               EUV ULES ae rye cau cine Se ee:     19
    (Oli es Ree ea eee aaa At                      6               CAmIVORES wan aterm     ea wire     16

 Discounting for the moment the possibility of error in a few identifications and
 the failure to list some doubtful forms, the above table may serve as a representa-
 tive sample.’**
     The life-forms on the pottery do not correspond quantitatively, nor typo-
 logically as a whole, with the animal remains found at Mimbres ruins (e.g.,
 Cosgrove and Cosgrove, 1932, pp. 3-5; Nesbitt, 1931, p. 19). Nor do they corre-
 spond, very closely at least, with the diet of Pueblo people as it is generally
 recognized. Insects, reptiles and amphibians, carnivores, and finally humans are
 not within the range of food usage. As for fish, the picture presented by the
 ethnographic accounts is neither complete nor very clear, but it is safe to say
 that this article of diet was never important and is actually taboo among the
188


Hopi and Zuni. It is probable that neither parrots nor scorpions were eaten,
and the relative numbers of swallow-like and other small birds are quite surely
out of proportion to any food utilization they might have had. There remain
only rabbits, snails, and herbivorous quadrupeds to represent the food quest.
But among these, rabbits occur less frequently upon the pottery than do humans,
small birds, fish, and insects; deer occur less than insects, turtles, and swallow-
like forms; antelope and mountain sheep less than insects, fish, humans, and
small birds. It is apparent that the decoration of Mimbres pottery was in-
fluenced by other considerations than the food quest.
    Nor does it appear that clothing or other utilitarian arts were the vitalizing
factors. Little or no vegetal material is depicted and the hide-producing forms,
such as deer, antelope, sheep, and rabbit, have been shown to be of less
numerical importance than the non-hide-producers. The predominance of birds
might point to an interest in feathers for dress or ornamentation, but this still
does not explain the prevalence of fish, insects, and turtles. In the light of these
facts, it seems highly probable that the non-utilitarian forms, as well as those
which might be thought at first glance to have some practical significance,
actually contain an esoteric, non-material import and indicate the concern of
the Mimbrefios with environmental aspects other than subsistence and material
things.
    Another lead may be suggested. Throughout the Southwest among the living
Pueblos, the potters are predominantly women. However, with the exception of
delineations of childbirth, the scene which is so similar to the Aztec manner of
showing sexual intercourse (Cosgrove and Cosgrove, 1932, plate 225e; Nesbitt,
1931, plate 25a), and a very few other possibilities, all human figures on the
examined Mimbres pottery are male, and depict purely male activities. The
same correlation can be noted for the non-human figures: there is a concern
with usually masculine occupations, with game and the hunt or with ritual as
implied by parrots. Perhaps the presence of fish, reptiles, insects, and the like
indicates female participation, but the dominance of male-connected activities
where the identification is sure would appear to make this unlikely. Furthermore,
the tendency toward geometric design and stylized rather than natural life-forms
in the Southwest where female artisanship is undoubted makes the uniqueness of
Mimbres artistry all the more suggestive of male authorship for at least the life-
forms. Whether the making of pottery and the drawing of the geometric designs
which appear on Mimbres pottery were also the work of men is another problem
which, together with the testing of the above hypothesis, should prove an inter-
esting study. A thorough and careful analysis might lead to acceptable inferences
as to the religious ideas and organization of the Mimbres people.
     When it comes to the identification of animal bones found in archeological
excavations, the amount of information to be sought does not end with a specific
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             189

or generic designation. The age, sex, and part of the organism are also important
 aids to the interpretive work of the archeologist. For example, the age of the
 individuals can often provide information on seasonal occupations and food
 preferences. Immature birds and mammals are alive only at certain seasons of
 the year. Similarly, migratory birds are present in given localities only at times
 definable within relatively narrow limits. Should numbers of bones thus reduce-
 able to seasonal limits be found within particular strata, it would be possible to
 date the deposits to their season. With this as a known factor, inferences could
be made as to the significance of consistently associated materials: buffalo bones
 appearing with young birds would indicate a spring hunt, a ceremonial object
 with goose bones in New Mexico would mean either a spring or late fall cere-
mony, etc. Such seasonal data might also lead to hypotheses as to the seasonal
 occupancy of shell mounds and caves, which would, in turn, lead to modification
of ideas concerning the length of occupation, nature of the human groups using
 the sites, meaning of the absence of certain expectable artifacts.
     Of course the same procedure is applicable to vegetal remains. Plants ripen
and produce edible seeds only at definite times during the year. Pinon nuts are
available at specific times which are not the same as those when the maguey
stalks are ready for roasting. If these two forms are associated in a cave deposit,
what does it mean? Were the nuts stored and, if so, where? If they were stored
in the cave, does it mean that the people lived in the cave permanently or that,
being migratory, they returned to the cave and their cache of nuts at the time
when the maguey sap began to run? What evidence for caches is there in the
cave itself? What indications are there of permanent or intermittent occupation?
If the people could count on their cache of nuts being safe in the cave from the
fall until spring, what implications does this fact have for the human groups
occupying this region? Might it signify hunting and gathering territories, or
possibly the sole use of transient stopping places by certain nomadic groups?
Or does it merely mean that they took the chance of hiding the cache well
enough to escape notice until they returned? Whatever might come of such
speculation and the analysis and testing that should follow, the point which I
wish to raise is that there is more to the presence of pifon nuts and burned
maguey stalks than just their existence in the cave.
     The climates under which bygone peoples lived are also of importance in the
construction of a cultural context. The fact that biological forms appear naturally
in constellations, that there are such things as ecological groupings, that a
certain biota is indicative of certain climatic and physiographic conditions can
be of great assistance to the archeologist bent upon obtaining a picture of past
actuality. Success along these lines will depend upon his collections of floral,
faunal, and geologic materials and upon thorough analysis by competent
specialists.
 190


                               d. Non-local   Human
       There should be no need to point out the importance of obtaining cultural
  and biological information on the human societies that lived in the neighborhood
  of a site at a time either before, during, or after its occupation. But it should
  be mentioned that the value of this perception lies not only in its use for com-
  parative studies and the interpretation of use and function, but also for the
  insight it gives into other, possibly more obscure, cultural aspects. Just as
  knowledge of modern Hopi (or Keres?) culture will be of help in interpreting
  the murals found at the ruined pueblo of Awatovi, so will other, perhaps less
  obvious and more far-fetched, information serve to clear up problems (and to
  lead onward to new ones) that otherwise might not be answered on purely
  archeological grounds.
       For example, within the Coahuila site called Frightful Cave, there were
  found nearly a thousand sandals made of plaited fiber. Some of these are long
  and some short, obviously having been made for feet of different sizes. But
  what sizes? Perhaps it would be possible merely to measure the length of each
  sandal and assume that this dimension represents the length of the foot which
  wore the sandal. But the wear on individual sandals shows that they were
  made somewhat longer than the feet which wore them. But how much longer?
  A short and informal study of the living Mexican, sandal-wearing population of
  the region demonstrated that their modern sandals extend, on an average, one-
  half inch both before, behind, and beside the foot. Some questioning elicited
  the statement that this extension is necessary so as to protect the foot against
  rocks and cactus over which one is constantly traveling in desert and moun-
  tainous country. A broader extension would make the sandal too clumsy and
  unwieldy. A test of a sample lot of the archeological specimens shows that, when
  heel and toe depressions are present, they also range closely around a point
  one-half inch from their respective margins. With these data, it will be possible
  to estimate the range of actual foot size among the bygone people of the area
  and to make some hypotheses as to stature and age-group of the population,
  e.g., adults, adolescents, children. If it is assumed that the proportion of these
  age-groups within the cave as a whole reflects their relative numbers within
  the bands that occupied the cave, some idea will be forthcoming as to the
  constitution of these bands.
       Ethnographic accounts, documentary sources, other archeological reports,
  the habits, customs, practices of living groups, all provide valuable hints and
| leads. (Going on the assumption that an interpretation has more chance of
  being correct if it corresponds with some known practice of similar or neighbor-
  ing societies than if it finds no parallel in any known human group, the value
  of non-local information on cultural or physical subjects is plain./
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              191

                      e. Non-contemporaneous     Geographical
    The value of the information included under this heading is of a rather
special and restricted kind. In most instances, it has to do with such things
as the /‘physiographic changes which might have caused a site to be occupied
or abandoned and the geographic factors which may have kept earlier or later
people from using the same location; These data are often difficult or impossible
to secure, and even then ‘they may be of little significance either for constructing
a cultural context or for comparative purposes. It is probably not an over-
statement to say that this is the least important category into which pertinent
data fall.

    One final point may be mentioned in connection with the whole matter of
the collection of archeological data. I believe it is possible to say without
injustice to any particular field worker that, however carefully the archeologist
preserves his findings either in the form of notes or specimens, he always finds
that there is information which he needs for his analysis but which he does not
have in his records. Critical details will beg for elaboration and clarification
during laboratory study, but there will be no way of bettering the situation.
Only experience and the failings of former jobs will tell the archeologist what
he should be on the lookout for in his next investigation. For these reasons
there is only one axiom to be remembered: when in doubt, preserve! Many
things which may seem trivial and merely an added burden at the time of
excavation may turn out to be of great importance to a full-blown cultural
picture. It is worth preserving these data at the expense of a little extra labor
and the following out of a few blind leads. When in doubt, preserve!

                                     2. STUDY

    In the preceding pages, the type of materials to be collected and some of
the reasons for collecting them have been given. Therefore, the character of the
study upon    them has been implicit in the whole        discussion. Briefly, study
should be detailed and go beyond the mere requirements of a comparative
approach. For comparative purposes, it may be sufficient to know that two
basketry trays found at two sites are descriptively similar in their gross
features of materials, technique of manufacture, and design. But in order to
extract as much of the cultural significance as possible from the tray at one
particular site, it is necessary to notice its charred pitting indicative of live
coals, the extent to which it is pitted, the sources of its component materials,
the quality of manufacture, the presence of dried mush in its crevices. Two
superficially similar bone awls may be found to have entirely different types of
scratches on them, or their points may be sharpened or worn in contrasting
192


ways. The direction of beveling on stone points may be consistent in specific
associations, sites, areas, and thus indicate handedness among the people or
some culture norm over and above shape, material, and other gross attributes.
The wear on the bottom of a certain pottery bowl, in contrast to the wear on
the bottoms of other like forms, may be indicative of the length and manner of
its use. Errors in weaving technique may not have extra-local comparative
importance, but they have a cultural and individual significance, especially if
carelessness in weaving is in opposition to care in some other technical process
or if only a few textiles show poor workmanship while the majority are well
fashioned.
   _ Once more it may be asked: what good is it if a cultural item is foundto
have counterparts in other sites, if nothing is known of the significance of
that item within its own cultural context? Of what value is it if a comparative
study demonstrates temporal and cultural relationships between sites, while
little or nothing is known of the culture of those sites? What is the purpose
of working out the distribution of flanged bowls in the Maya area? If the answer
to this is that it will tell us the temporal and cultural relationships which existed
between certain Maya sites, we may continue to ask: what is the purpose of
learning which sites are later than others in the Maya area and which had
cultural relations with which? Is it not for the purpose of understanding the
nature, the change, the growth of Maya “civilization”? If this is granted, the
next question is: How can we understand the nature, change, or growth of
anything about which we know only superficials? Would it not be wiser, in
addition to learning the spatial location of flanged bowls or plumbate ware, also
to make every effort to learn their materials, techniques, use, function, meaning,
in other words their places within the cultural whole?
     From the foregoing, it is apparent that not only will the archeologist have
to study his material with finer perception, but also he will have to employ
the services of many other scientific specialists in order to secure the informa-
tion which he needs for his purposes. In order that materials of manufacture
may be identified and traced to their sources, in order that the more compli-
cated techniques may be recognized, in order that the environment and its
utilization may be understood, the archeologist will be forced, except in rela-
tively rare cases, to call upon the aid of colleagues in other disciplines. If a
society consistently used a particular wood for its projectile foreshafts or if
it obtained its pigments or clay from distant deposits, these facts are in addi-
tion to the information on trade and contact relations. They are of importance
for a picture and an understanding of the culture itself. Therefore, the identifica-
tion of all possible materials and techniques is a goal which should be constantly
in mind and consistently sought. This is a hampering requirement, but the
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              193

  information is vital. I shall refer to the practical aspects of this problem at a
  later time in this chapter.
                                      a. Criticism
      As the term is used here, criticism involves the making of judgments as to
  the validity and applicability of the archeological finds. Is there any doubt as
  to provenience; is there any indication of disturbance, reversed stratigraphy, or
~ other movement in the deposit after primary deposition? Can a find be accounted
  for on other grounds than human agency? Does an increase in, say, pifion
  shells signify a cultural phenomenon, or is it a function of environmental
  change? Criticism in many instances will have to come after analysis and
  interpretation, but usually it is one of the first avenues of attack upon arche-
  ological materials.
                                      b. Analysis
    /Analysis involves the study of archeological data in terms of their em-
_Pirical attributes, including their provenience, associations, and specifications,
_in other words their /empirical “forms.’/ Analysis also includes the typing and
  classifying of forms according to their empirical attributes and affinities. With
  regard to cultural data, form is the most obvious feature, being empirical, and
  the most readily comparable. It is not to be wondered, then, that it has
  received the bulk of attention by archeologists since that time when they became
  conscious of the ‘objective’? method and eschewed the free and easy inter-
  pretation of the earlier workers.
      But form may be misleading even in comparative studies, and most certainly
  it is a very superficial aspect of any cultural item. It is a prime requisite for
  further investigation, but it should not be the end-point of archeological study.
  Form is actually only the outward shell of the matter. The kernel lies inside.

                                   c. Interpretation
        Interpretation’ involves the study of archeological data for the purpose of!
    discovering their technique of manufacture, use, function, and the idea or ideas
    which lay behind them. It also includes the typing and classifying of cultural
  _phenomena on the basis of groupings which are inferred to have been pertinent
_ to the culture and people under investigation. It is at this point that the
   cultural conjunctives, the relationships between the archeological data of a
" society or cultural entity, play their important part. Often this interpretation is
    neither easy nor the means obvious, but if archeology intends to attain the level
    of context, if it professes to become either anthropology or historiography, this
    is an essential step in the process. Archeology should not deal only with empirical
  form.
194


                                 d. Description
    Description follows analysis and interpretation in this outline because the
determination of the attributes which are considered important enough to
describe depends upon these two preliminary steps. It is impossible to describe
fully and “objectively” even the simplest object. Analysis and interpretation are _
necessary, therefore, in order to distinguish those features that are important
(and those that are not) within the given frame of reference which, in this
instance and speaking broadly, is that of human culture.
                                3. PRESENTATION

    Presentation of the mass of detailed, descriptive data gathered by their
research is one of the major problems faced by all archeologists. The greater
amount of both data and detail demanded by the conjunctive approach only
adds to the difficulty. It has already been maintained that these data should
be preserved in their entirety and that the empirical bases for all published
interpretations and inferences should be given to the reader. Archeology, as
well as other disciplines, must endeavor to make its findings cumulative.
    In view of these needs and their attendant problems, it is evident that special
methods and techniques for handling this wealth of detail will have to be
developed. And once more it seems that compromise will have to be effected
between the ideal and such contingent factors as finances, space, time. This
will be so either until the archeologists work out means to present the mass
of material or until more abundant subsidies and publication facilities are
available to them. Nevertheless, it may be possible to make some practical
suggestions as to ways in which the ideal may be approached, even ultimately
attained.
    First, it should be remembered that the presentation of the detailed descrip-
tive data is primarily for the specialist who wishes to check or follow out the
archeologist’s conclusions or who seeks material for further comparison and
study. For those whose interests lie solely in the broad cultural picture and
not in intensive study, the cultural context should be sufficient. Therefore the
publication of the descriptive data themselves may be as technical, as abbre-
viated, as tabular, in short as “dull and uninteresting” as demanded by the
dictates of practicability, yet consistent with the limits of clarity and fullness.
There is no call upon the archeologist, at least in his sections devoted to the
evidence, to attempt a work of literary art.
    The presentation falls roughly into three divisions: excavation procedure,
description, and interpretation. In practice, these will often overlap and may be
impossible to treat separately. For example, it is often impractical to divorce
the account of excavation procedure from the description of the deposits
excavated or the cultural features, such as caches or fire-pits, found during the
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              195


course of the work. On the other hand, there is one point which should be
strictly observed: to make explicit and clear what is interpretive description
and what is description of an observational order.

                             a. Excavation   Procedure
    This section is primarily concerned with the archeological deposits and
how they have been handled by the archeologist. It is designed to provide the
means for a critical judgment and analysis of the methods and techniques
employed by the excavator to obtain his data. It may be profitable, in some
cases, to include the provenience and details of association of the material
found during excavation. In other cases, especially when there is a large
quantity of findings, it may be better merely to recount the excavation methods
and to leave the description of deposits and their contents for separate treatment.

                              b. Descriptive Section
     This is concerned with the nature of the deposits and their contents or, in
the case of unburied material, with the particulars of these phenomena. The
section is purely and admittedly empirical and descriptive and therefore can
best be served by the use of descriptive rubrics. Here is the spot in an arche-
ological report where such headings as Bone Artifacts, Objects of Shell, Pits, etc.,
have their proper place. In fact, special care should be taken that no inter-
pretive question is begged by the use of cultural, i.e., inferential, headings, the
implications of which have not been thought out and explicitly demonstrated.
Here the concern is with empirical form, type, and class.
     Furthermore, description should cover the full range of variation. Purely
typological exposition, even when accompanied by quantitative data, is not
sufficient, Cultural phenomena are amenable to categorization only within
limits, and variation is one of the most characteristic and one of the most sig-
nificant factors about all culture. It is this fact that has given rise to Linton’s
valuable concepts of ideal and actual patterns (1936b, pp. 99ff, esp. p. 101).
The archeologist is dealing with the results of actual behavior, with the
objectifications of actual patterns. There is every expectation that these will
show variation, and variation of a culturally significant sort. If, therefore, the
archeologist completely replaces these actual phenomena with generalized pat-
terns of his own, he is not only obscuring the picture but also throwing away
some of his most realistic and precious data. While it is true that he should
attempt to abstract the ideal patterns inherent in the actual patterns of his
material, he should not completely submerge his observational data in a
classification of his own devising. If he presents only his own groupings without
indicating the actual variation, no matter how closely his categories may cor-
respond to the ideal patterns of the culture under investigation, he is at best
196


losing much of the significance of his material and at worst may be seriously
warping his picture of the culture.
    It is suggested, therefore, that the archeologist present his empirical cate-
gories and then proceed to indicate the range of variation and the specific
details of the finds which come under that heading. For example, after giving
a typological description of “triangular stone points” covering the specifications
and affinities of the type as a whole, there should be added the dimensions,
petrography, and other individual features of each specimen. Many of these
data can be tabulated or given in predesignated outline form.

                              c. Interpretive Section
    This has to do with the techniques of manufacture, use, function, the
culture ideas, and the meanings of the archeological material. Analysis and
discussion along these lines may be segregated in a separate section or incor-
porated with the preceding one, either following or being interlarded with the
pertinent empirical data. Close physical proximity of these two aspects within
the body of the report need be ino cause for confusion, so long as the observa-
tional and interpretive details are explicitly identified.
    At this point in the account, the interpretive groundwork for the subsequent
cultural synthesis should be the first concern of the author. It will save much
lengthy, disconcerting, and highly parenthetical discussion when it comes time
to develop the cultural context if the interpretive analysis, the weighing of
evidence, the arguments pro and con are all finished and at least some con-
clusion, negative, neutral, or positive, is reached at this early stage in the report.
     It is, of course, realized that in order to accomplish this purpose, extra-local
comparisons of artifacts and other individual items will have to be made. And
this is the best place for them to be made. In contradistinction to the compari-
sons made on the basis of cultural contexts or extensive cultural complexes,
those to be made at this place are of single items or categories. The full range
of distribution may be treated here and hypotheses as to relationships made on
more tenuous and far-flung likenesses than would be advisable to use for the
comparison of larger cultural units such as complexes or contexts. In other
words, in the presentation of the empirical and inferential analyses of individual
finds, comparative studies of individual finds and categories are also in order.
     One last point may be mentioned. There is a definite and urgent need for
some method of reference whereby each and every find can be identified during
the course of an archeological report without having to be redescribed or
identified at length at each citation. It should be possible to discuss the finding
of a given stone point and to give its associations in the section on excavation
procedure, to describe its form in the descriptive section, and to make use of its
cultural implications in the final section on cultural synthesis, without being
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 197

 forced in each instance to make long, detailed, and repetitive identification. It is
of the utmost importance that the reader be made aware that the description
on page so-and-so refers to the same point whose provenience is given on page
such-and-such and which is utilized for cultural interpretation on yet another
page of the report. The failure to provide such cross checks is one of the most
confusing and frustrating features of current publications on Americanist
archeology.
     A remedy for this situation may be suggested. As an appendix to the
archeological report, a serial catalogue of finds may be given, listing, after a
serial number and short identifying tag such as “stone point,” “mano,” “fore-
shaft,” etc., the provenience of the item. In order to kill several birds with one
stone, other data might also be included, specifications such as dimensions, ma-
terial of manufacture, etc., and even an index to the textual citations of each
item. By such a catalogue and with constant reference whenever a find is men-
tioned in the report, the data will be “brought down to units” capable of being
assembled and reassembled any number of times and in any number of ways.
The individual items and their potentially significant variation from the cate-
gorical norm will not be smothered in a welter of taxonomy and more or less
arbitrary groupings made by the archeologist. Such a method would help to
preserve and keep to the fore the associations and relationships, the all-
important cultural conjunctives, which are vital factors in the construction of
cultural contexts.
     The system advocated here is a modification of that employed by ethnog-
raphers to refer to information received from certain, specified informants
(e.g., Kroeber, ed., 1935b; Wyman and Kluckhohn, 1938), but an archeological
illustration may be taken from the records of the U.S. National Museum
Coahuila Expedition of 1940-1941. As part of the laboratory work, the field
catalogue was transferred to an “Accession Book” wherein the specimens of
each’ empirical grouping such as stone, bone, fiber, shell, were listed serially for
each site excavated. This record is such that it can be transferred directly (with
only minor corrections) to an appendix of the final report. By using this roster
in writing the sections in the body of the report, it will be possible to proceed
generally as follows:

In the .50-1.00 m level of block E 16, at a point .30 m from the west wall [etc.], a bone
artifact (Z-21) was found lying just two cms. north of a charred tray of coiled basketry
(E2523) er

then in the Descriptive Section under Bone Artifacts:

Z-21: a bone point .01 m wide, .20 m long [etc.], from its appearance and its proximity
to the basketry tray (F-523), it may be interpreted as an awl... .
198


then in the cultural context under Textile Industry:
.. . for use in basketry, the people of Frightful Cave employed rather long, thin
awls made of deer metapodial worked down to sharp but short points (Z-21)....

It might be possible, if the descriptive and interpretive sections had been handled
fully and clearly,   to forego numerical   identifications   in the writing   of the
cultural context. Such a practice would make for easier reading and a more
vivid picture and would, in fact, be the ideal presentation. However, a compro-
mise course, one in which the least obvious points would be clarified by refer-
ence, might serve expediency,    clarity, and accuracy.

    In closing this account of the conjunctive approach, a word may be said
about practical considerations, which in the usual run of archeological affairs
mean financial considerations. It should be evident that the requirements of such
detailed and intensive work, both in the field and in the laboratory, will demand
not a little revision of the expenditure of archeological funds. Assuming a more
or less constant budget, how can the work be done and the money to do it
with be balanced? A few ideas may be put forward along these lines but,
whether they prove satisfactory or not, it remains a fact that the detailed work
must be accomplished—otherwise the archeologist may as well shut up shop as
a historian or anthropologist.
    The first and major solution is, I believe, to excavate less extensively and
more intensively for shorter periods of time. If the data are extracted with
anything like the proper refinement and if they are studied in the necessary
detail, the product of a very brief excavation will occupy the efforts of the
archeologist and his assistants in the laboratory for a remarkably long time.
But when the job is done, the ensuing report may be expected to provide more
valuable and better grounded information than one resulting from a longer and
less intensive excavation with a more hurried and superficial study.
     Such intensive field work requires an increased amount of supervision. Two
solutions are offered for this problem. First, the professionally trained personnel
should work more than my observations have led me to believe they are
accustomed to do at present. An effort should be made to make the most of
every member of the trained staff during the period of actual field work which,
however, should be short enough to forestall “going stale.” Second, and perhaps
 more congenial to expedition directors, a plan should be worked out to attract
 more (and the more serious) students to the field, either to act as laborer-
 technicians or merely to supervise other labor. Such students would receive
 no remuneration.
     Experience in archeological techniques should not be looked upon either by
 the student or by the professional and academic group as a side-line which can
TAYLOR                    A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             199


be picked up in desultory fashion. It is only by continued and broad experience
that the archeologist learns to recognize what is significant and how to record,
concisely and completely, those data which he will require for his cultural
interpretations. Just as he should be conversant with culture in the ethnographic
realm, so he must become familiar with culture viewed archeologically. The
data seen from each of these two angles are different to such an extent that
proficiency in one does not necessarily or automatically indicate proficiency in
the other. Relationships of cultural phenomena in the ground often appear
quite different from those that are observed or described in actual practice
among living peoples. Experience, and the imagination born of experience and
reading, are essential parts of the professional’s repertory, and it should be
made possible for the student, and attractive to him, to obtain as much of
both as he can before he attempts to do his own work. Archeological field work
of an intensive sort should not be considered a vacation; perhaps it is a change,
but is hard and tedious work and deserves recognition as such.’
    Therefore, it should be possible for a student to earn academic credits by
diligently performing archeological work under an accredited professional and
according to the same standards set up for other scholastic performance by
the student’s institution. What is being advocated here is a system of arche-
ological apprenticeship, whereby the student is given the incentive of academic
credit for field work under proper direction. Such a system would relieve the
pressure on archeological budgets and would develop a pool of student arche-
ologists with considerable broad and practical experience.
    What is perhaps even more important, it would involve passing judgment
upon the professional archeologists themselves. In other words, it is to be
presumed that an academic institution or department would give credit only
for work done under what it considered to be competent and exacting direction.
In this fashion, only the better-regarded archeologists would be able to obtain
the desired student help and a practical premium would be placed on “good”
archeology. This would serve to improve the field from the professional as well
as from the student level and would expectably bring about a stiffening of
professional standards which current book reviews and criticisms do not seem
able to do. If it came down to awarding academic credit, I believe a more
rigorous judgment would be passed, assuming the institution to be jealous of its
standards.
    Concerning the laboratory study of the excavated material, three points may
be raised, two of which are similar to the above. If it is granted that the
time in the field should be utilized to the utmost, then much study and
analysis can be accomplished there by the personnel of the expedition. Trade-
union hours have little place in the schedule of archeologists in the field, and
the day does not need to end when work in the trenches is through. On the
200


supposition that the effort will not carry on unduly, it can be asked of the
personnel that they exert themselves to the maximum for the duration. It is
needless to mention that this field study is also of great advantage because of
the problems it raises and the leads it gives toward further and more pertinent
investigations. Second: when students are available and can be supervised, they
may be used in the “home” laboratory as well as in the field. Academic or
publication credit may be provided or even the allotment of small subsidies
which, nevertheless, would be less strain on the budget than the extended
services of some salaried professional, e.g., the expedition director or a specialist.
    And third: some arrangement should be made on a broad and long-range
basis so that the costs of special laboratory investigations such as dendro-
chronology, petrography, serology, botanical identification, can be underwritten
by philanthropic institutions as a regular and recognized part of their programs.
The dependence    of archeological   research   on such identifications   and special
studies is understandably greater than that of other anthropological sub-
disciplines, and so crucial a factor in its success or failure that too much
emphasis cannot be laid upon such help. Yet one of the worst blocks that faces
the archeologist is his inability to get identifications and pertinent information
on his varied materials within a reasonable time or with the necessary detail.
     The main reason for this situation seems to be that the specialists have
been doing the work as an incidental, rather than an integral, part of their own
research. For the most part, the identifications and other studies have been
done without charge, as a favor to the archeologists or to their institutions, and
apparently often as “spare time” projects. To my knowledge some specimens
have. been in these channels for five years and more! This unhealthy situation
might be remedied, I believe, if the specialists could be led to look upon this
work as a personally rewarding part of their own regular research program, not
merely as a favor or service to another discipline. What is necessary is to
demonstrate that there is something of value in it for them. If they can be
convinced that the work is a joint project of mutual benefit and if they were
given enough financial support to enable them regularly to devote time, then
I believe that the block would be well on its way out.
    There are at least three means of promoting this attitude among the
specialists. First is to bring to their attention the fact that archeological sites
have preserved, and are producing, materials of great importance to their own
studies, e.g., materials from that twilight zone between the modern and the
strictly paleontologic. Here are the immediate forerunners of modern forms
and all given to them, often dated to the year over a long span of time, with
no expense to their own budgets. Second is to encourage the specialists to
conduct investigations and to publish papers along the interests of their own
professions, based upon the archeologically derived materials. In the past, it
TAYLOR                         A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                          201

seems that much of the work was viewed merely as wearisome identification
for another discipline, for which at best they were allotted an appendix and
many   times only a footnote of acknowledgment in journals which their col-
leagues would never see. In place of this, they should be encouraged to publish
in their own periodicals, under their own names, and on topics pertinent to
their own interests, the-only proviso being that they furnish either there or
separately the data needed by the archeologist. Third is to collect the materials e
from archeological sites in such a manner that they can be utilized by the
specialists, not only for identification purposes but also for their own investiga-
tions. This means (a) the collections must be adequate samples or total universes,
not representative specimens, in order to permit conclusions; (b) the collections
must be in as good physical condition as possible (clean, labeled, boxed, etc.),
so that too much work of a purely preparatory nature will not have to be done
by the specialist; (c) the catalogue should be as detailed as possible and
available to the specialist/
    One of the major problems in implementing the above proposals is that of
finances. And here is a function which a central agency or clearing house, so
long needed in Americanist archeology, could perform to the undying gratitude
of the profession. To my mind, there is a definite and urgent need for an
organization with little operating costs to put all its funds into services, and
forego the impressive but non-utilitarian aspects of a large and beautiful plant.
And one of its major functions would be to subsidize the technical research
requirements of institutions actively engaged in archeological excavation. I do
not mean that it should merely have money available on application for such
projects. It would best assist in breaking the technical stranglehold on archeology
by conducting a permanent project of subsidization, not by employing and
housing a stable of specialists on any premises but by providing them regular,
yearly grants to be expended either in the field or in their own laboratories on
projects sent to them through the central agency. In the first place, this would
eliminate the overhead of many laboratories and specialists. It would also permit
the latter to remain in familiar and established surroundings, to plan their
yearly work, and to regard the identification and study of archeological speci-
mens as an integral part of their research program. The agency on its part
would make it generally known that it was in a position to subsidize a certain
amount of research by specified specialists; it would solicit projects; with the
participation of the specialist, it would select those that seemed the most worthy
and filled best the requirements established for collections; and it would forward
a note to the specialist that such-and-such a collection was coming to be worked
on under the year’s allotment.
    The archeologists would get better service. The specialist would benefit by
being able to plan for himself and/or his students. The agency would be able
202


to some extent to raise the standards of archeological collecting and bring home
to the archeologist the fact that there is more to the cultural picture than archi-
tecture and potsherds.

    In the preceding pages, a summary treatment of the ends and a few of the
means of the conjunctive approach have been offered. An archeological report
according to this viewpoint has been outlined as consisting of, first, a statement
of problem; second, a description and interpretation of the findings; third,
an analysis of local chronology; fourth, and of most concern, the construction
of a cultural context; fifth, the study of extra-local relationships of the material
as a cultural entity; and a possible sixth, the study of the cultural context and
its relationships in terms of special problems such as culture itself, art, archi-
 tecture, ceramics, etc.
      Once more it should be pointed out that the conjunctive approach is a
 conceptual scheme made explicit in a set of goals which, in turn, are best attained
 by certain means. This scheme is one which views archeological data as cultural
_data. It considers the writing of history to be the construction of cultural contexts
 with due regard for time, not merely the arrangement of events and cultural
 phenomena in temporally sequential order. It considers the writing of anthro-
 pology to be concerned with the nature of culture and cultural dynamics. It
 believes that even the fullest attainment of the objectives apparent in a purely
 comparative approach will not provide adequate material for the writing either
  of history or of anthropology. And it does not believe in the conception of
 archeological prestige which is apparently held by those who pursue the compara-
 tive approach, i.e., that it is more praiseworthy to dig much material from the
  ground than it is to make a full study of the material already excavated.
       The conjunctive approach is not concerned as to whether the particular
  archeologist has for his objective historiography or anthropology. But it does
  believe that, to justify itself as a social science as opposed to antiquarianism,
  archeology must at least writeyhistory, must at least construct the fullest pos-_
  sible cultural contexts. Beyond ‘this point, it recognizes the personal inclinations
  of the individual, either to stop or to go on to another level of procedure, be it
  the study of culture or any segment of the cultural whole: sociology, art,
  economics, mechanics, or whatever.
                                           NOTES
                                         CHAPTER         1

     *Cambridge University makes the distinction between General Archaeology which is
handled under the Faculty of Archaeology and Anthropology, and Classical Archaeology which
is under the Faculty of the Classics (Cambridge University, 1937, pp. 579-582). The same
separation is found at Oxford (Oxford University, 1935, p. 394). Both aspects are treated to-
gether at London and Edinburgh, while, at Liverpool, archeology means only “Mediterranean”
archeology (University of London, 1939, p. 39; University of Edinburgh, 1939-1940, pp. 205-
206; University of Liverpool, 1938, pp. 210-211).
     At the University of Paris, “general” archeology is under the Institut d’Ethnologie, while
Classical archeology is found in the Institut d’art et d’archeologie (University of Paris, 1939-
1940, pp. 181-182,   185-186).
     At Yale University, the Undergraduate Schools state: “For a major in archeology or
Ancient History or Classical Civilization the prerequisite is Classical Civilization 10... ora
college course in Greek or Latin.” In the Graduate Schools, Classical Archaeology is listed under
Classical Languages and Literature; Greek and Roman sculpture is listed under Archaeology
III; “prehistoric” and Americanist archeology is listed under the Department of Anthropology
(Yale University, 1939, pp. 137, 183-184, 189-190).
     At Columbia University, the Department of Fine Arts and Archaeology and the Depart-
ments of Greek and Latin offer archeology; under this heading there is the statement that
“Students interested in primitive archaeology should consult a representative of the Department
of Anthropology. . . .” Far Eastern archeology comes under History, Japanese, Chinese;
Mediaeval and Renaissance archeology under History; Near Eastern archeology under Semitic;
“primitive” and “prehistoric” archeology under Anthropology (Columbia University, 1940,
pp. 17-38).
     At the University of California, the Department of Art includes Group C which is titled
“History of Art and Archaeology”; the Classics Department includes Classical Archaeology,
Greek Mythology and Archaeological Discoveries, Classical Antiquities, Greek Scenic Antiquities
of the Fifth Century B.C.; the Anthropology Department includes Prehistory and Americanist
archeology (University of California, 1940, pp. 157-161, 165-169, 199-203).
     At Harvard, Pennsylvania, Chicago, and Wisconsin this same separation of “prehistoric”
and “primitive” from other archeology is to be found. At Princeton, archeology is found
under Art and Archaeology. (Harvard University, 1941, pp. 186 et seqg., 196, 244; University
of Pennsylvania, 1940, pp. 70-73, 114-115, 116, 133; University of Chicago, 1940, pp. 214-223,
322-328, 367-380; University of Wisconsin, 1940, pp. 104, 173; Princeton University, 1941,
pp. 67 et seq.).
    In all of the above, the latest pre-War announcements available have been used.
     Although the Archaeological Institute of America was founded with the explicit intent
of having “no narrow local interest” (1st Annual Report, 1880, p. 8), the subsequent history
of its membership and publications clearly shows the disruptive effects of the primitive-Classical
dichotomy. From the very first, the Papers of the Institute were divided into an American
Series and a Classical Series. The American Journal of Archaeology and of the History of the
Fine Arts (subtitle dropped after 1896), stated to be dedicated to furthering “the interests for
which the Institute was founded” (Vol. I, 1885, p. ii), has been from the start primarily an
organ for archeology other than Americanist, predominantly “Mediterranean.” On the other
hand, within the Institute, the American School of Prehistoric Research and the School of
                                               203
204


American Research (at first the School of American Archaeology)          have had definite ties with
the anthropological segment of archeology in the United States.
                                                                                            in the
     The American Anthropologist, although publishing from time to time articles
                                               gly  concerned  with “primitive” and “prehistoric, ”
“Mediterranean” field, has been overwhelmin
i.e, “anthropological” archeology. American Antiquity has been professedly Americanist and
the professional membership of the Society for American Archaeology has consistently over-
lapped that of the American Anthropological Association to a most significant degree. The
overlap with those professional archeologists who support the American Journal of Archaeology
is proportionately and significantly small. The same may be said for the overlap with sup-
porters of those Classical, Philological, Oriental, and Historical Journals that carry papers re-
sulting from archeological research.
     Frazer, 1898; Thompson, A. H., 1935. “Throughout the length and breadth of Italy,
memories of ancient greatness spurred her children on to emulation. . . . It was while gazing
on the ruins of Rome that Villani felt impelled to write his chronicle. Pavia honored Boethius
like a saint. Mantua struck coins with the head of Virgil, and Naples pointed out his tomb... .
It is, however, more to the purpose here to notice that in Italy this adoration of the antique
world was common to all classes; not students alone, but the people at large, regarded the
dead grandeur of the classic age as their special heritage.” (Symonds, 1908, pp. 29-31; see also
pp. 149ff., 152ff.)

      * Burckhardt, 1860, esp. pp. 90ff; von Martin, 1932, esp. pp. 20ff., S3ff.

     ‘“Winckelmann is justly regarded as the founder of the science of archaeology, for he was
the first to study ancient art from the historical—which is in this instance the scientific—point
of view” (Fowler and Wheeler, 1909, p. 13). See also Winckelmann, 1763-1768.
     “ “Archaeology of the spade’ and its results form the subject of this volume. By the term
archaeology is meant the archaeology of art; the products of civilization in so far as they
express no artistic character will only be mentioned incidentally. ... My main object has been
to give an account of the rise, the diffusion, and the deepening of our knowledge of Greek
art.” (Michaelis, 1908, p. xiii)

     *“Simple tomb-robbing gave place to a systematic search for ancient works of art, while
the profound respect of Renaissance engineers for classical builders and the growing interest in
ancient inscriptions led to an increasingly careful study of everything uncovered. . . . In all these
regions [the “Mediterranean” area] the investigators were dealing with highly civilized cultures
whose history was already partially known. They centered their investigations at first on the
finding of inscriptions and objects for museum display” (Linton, 1936a, pp. 306-307). See also
Wissler, 1942, esp. p. 190.

      “Barnes, 1936, pp. 226-227, and Shotwell, 1929, p. 596, give the historians’ point of view
concerning these men. See Encyclopedia        Britannica, articles “Antiquary,” “William   Camden,”
“Sir Robert Cotton,” “Matthew Parker,” “John Leland.” See also Hearne, ed., 1720. This is
a posthumous collection of the products of the society. See also: Prothero, 1909.
      "For “these dull volumes”: Dugdale, 1655-1673, 1656; Tanner, 1744, posthumous.
      * Anonymous, 1718-1747, This represents probably the first published work by the recon-
stituted Society. See also: Anonymous,      1800. This is the charter of the Society, which was not
granted until 1751. See also: Cust and Colvin, 1898.
      * Beers, 1901; Kendrick, 1927, esp. Chap. I: Piggott, 1937.

       Fairchild, 1928.
TAYLOR                             A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                    205


     “ Early beliefs about stone artifacts: Boule, 1921, pp. 1-27; Cartailhac, 1877; Evans,
1897a, esp. Chapters III and IV; Hamy, 1906.
     Antiquarian research in England after 1750: Borlase, 1764; Boys, 1792; Douglas, 1793;
Grose, 1773-1787; Hoare, 1812-1821.

    ™ Clark, K., 1928; Summers, 1941. Products of this influence: Britton, 1835, 1836; Pugin
and Willson, 1850. The Antiquary (Sir Walter Scott, 1816) is a contemporary picture of the
type of individual engaged in «hese pursuits.

    ** Leeds, 1936, contains a valuable bibliography; Neville, 1852; Wylie, 1852.
    “One object aimed at when this book first appeared, was to rescue archaeological
research from that limited range to which a too exclusive devotion to classical studies had
given rise; and, especially in relation to Scotland, to prove how greatly more comprehensive
and important are its native antiquities than all the traces of intruded arts.’”’ (Wilson, D.,
1863, preface)
     “To each of these classes [of Ancient British and Celtic remains] I propose devoting a
few pages, so as to give a general insight into the remains of that, and subsequent, periods
of our early history” (Jewitt, 1877, p. 1). “Its [the book’s] object is to give a sketch of
that part of our history which is not generally treated of, the period before Britain became
Christian England. . . . Every article which, as just stated, is turned up by the spade or the
plough, is a record of that history. .. .” (Wright, 1885, pp. v-vi)
     “Thus we are attempting to push back the history of Sussex beyond the coming of the
South Saxons, beyond the Romans, beyond even the ‘Ancient Britons’. (Curwen, 1937, p. 2)
     Similar opinions in: Clark, G., 1940, p. 2; Hunt, 1884, p. v.

     “For history of development and bibliography:          Cochet, 1855; Encyclopedia Britannica,
article: “Quicherat”;    Reinach, 1898.

     *Simek,   1914;     Stocky, 1924.
     ** Encyclopedia    Britannica, article: “Antiquary”;    Stemmermann,    1934.

     1 American Antiquarian Society, 1820, p. 27; Beltz, 1927; MacCurdy, 1924, Vol. 1, p. 13;
Muller, 1897; Nelson, 1937, p. 83; Undset, 1887.
     For development of archeology in other areas: Heierli, 1901 (Switzerland); Menghin,
1917-1918 (Balkans); Pigorini, 1874 (Italy); Tallgren, 1922 (East Baltic).

     18“The history of Europe begins outside Europe. Its civilization is so deeply indebted
to the older civilizations of Egypt and South-Western Asia that for the study of its growth the
early history of those lands is more important than the barbarous life which Celts, Germans,
and others lived within the limits of Europe.” (Cambridge Ancient History, 1923, Preface
to Vol. I, p. v)
      Childe, 1925. In his Preface to the first edition, Childe is more cautious than the above
 quotation, but in the Preface to the edition of 1939 he has become convinced of the
 magnitude of Oriental influence upon European civilization.
      “Before it was Romanized, before it was Hellenized, the ancient world was Aegeanized.”
 (Henri Berr in Glotz, 1925, p. vi)
      “This book is an attempt, based on the findings of archaeology, to trace in outline the
 early foundations      of human   culture   in Europe   (p. 1). What,   then, of human   culture     in
 what we know as Europe? Its long-drawn-out genesis, however remote its inception, leads
 at last to our own Civilization: its prehistory comes ultimately to lie directly behind the
 historic records of our own doings [p. 4].” (Hawkes, 1940)
206


      ” Evans,     1897b;    MacCurdy,         1924, pp. 17-18.
                                                                      For an    earlier rebuttal     by reassertion       see
     * white, A. D., 1910, esp. Chapters VI-X.
Augustine’s De Civitate Dei, A.D. 413-4306.

      2 Huxley,     1871;    Osborn,       1929, esp. pp. 127-130.

     * Evans, 1897a, pp. 526ff; Prestwich, 1899, p. 119. This is an interesting letter crediting
Boucher. See also: Schorr, 1935, pp. 437ff.

    * Dieserud, 1908; Haddon,                   1934;     Honigsheim,         1942;   Lowie,      1937;    Marett,      1934;
Myres, 1916; Penniman, 1935.
      “Boyd,      1934; Haven,         1855; Mitra, 1933; Nelson, 1937;                Wissler,    1942.

     % Adair, 1775; Barton, 1797; Bureau of American Ethnology, 1907, articles: “Lost Ten
Tribes”, “Popular Fallacies’; Fowke, 1902, Chapters III, IV; Henshaw, 1905, pp. 104-105,
111-112.

      28 Chamberlain,       1907, pp. 499-500;           Jefferson,    1788, p. 105.
     * Fowke,       1902. The titles indicate the purpose and interest of these works:                           Delafield,
1839; Drake,        1832; Haywood, 1823; McCulloh, 1829; Priest, 1835.
    8 Beckwith, 1855; Emory, 1848; Hughes, 1848. This is Doniphan’s expedition. See also:
Simpson, 1852; Whipple, 1856.
      “The       same     work     which     in Troy     has been      done     by running a section          through     the
massive earth heaps, and in Europe by excavation in caves and gravel beds or shell heaps,
has been done here by traveling over the whole continent. In fact, the work has been done
by traveling rather than by digging” (Peet, 1879, pp. 212-213). See also: Mitra, 1933, Sec. III.
    °°Hayden, 1867-1883. This became the U. S. Geological Survey in 1879. See also: Powell,
1877-1893; Wheeler, 1875-1889 (Archaeological volume, VII, 1879).
     * A list of first contributions and of those which first contributed to the author’s future
fame: Brinton, 1866a and 1866b; Mason, 1873 (see: Hough, 1898, for obituary); Morgan,
1849, 1851, 1871; Powell, 1875a and 1875b (see: Dellenbaugh, 1918, and Hobbs, 1934, for
appreciations). Putnam became Curator of the Peabody Museum of Harvard University in
1875 and eleven years later was appointed Peabody Professor of Anthropology. (See: Kroeber,
1915, for obituary.)
    * Bureau of American Ethnology established 1879; first Annual Report, 1879-1880,
published at Washington, 1881. The Archaeological Institute of America organized 1879;
first report      1880.   American         Association    for the Advancement           of Science,        first permanent
Subsection VI, Anthropology, of Section B formed probably 1875; first transactions 1876;
Section H, Anthropology, formed at 1881 meeting. Anthropological Society of Washington
founded 1879; became American Anthropological Association 1890. American Ethnological
Society reorganized as Anthropological Institute in 1871. Congrés International des Améri-
canistes, 1st session, Nancy, 1875.


                                                     CHAPTER             2
      “Brinton,      1892; MacCurdy,            1899, 1902. In his “On Limitations                 to the Use of Some
Anthropologic       Data”        (1879),    Powell   lists Archaeology         as his first subheading.
      For the relation of archeology to anthropology at the Peabody Museum of Harvard under
Putnam, see Kroeber, 1915, esp. pp. 714-715.
TAYLOR                              A STUDY        OF ARCHEOLOGY                                                   207

     * “Southwestern archeology has long occupied a prominent place in North American
anthropological researches.” (Roberts, 1935, p. 507)
     a      . the anthropologist has taken as his particular field the study of languages and
cultures of nonliterate peoples (ethnology), of prehistoric cultures (archaeology), and of
human evolution (physical anthropology).” (Strong, 1936, p. 364)
     “And to archaeology, that branch of anthropology which deals with prehistoric peoples,
is delegated the task of recovering as much as possible of the story of the rise and spread of
early cultures     and    of their+flowering    into   the various      historic    civilizations.”     (Kidder    and
Thompson,     1938, p. 494)
     ““To the writer, ethnology and archaeology, far from being isolated studies, are
actually two inseparable means to an essential end—the attainment of the most complete
understanding possible of human culture at all places and in all times.” (Strong, 1935, p. 6)
     “The ultimate goal of American archaeology, which is to contribute to the knowledge
of human experience, can be. . . .” (Guthe, 1942, p. v)
     “Although the immediate and obvious purpose of archeological work is to fill out our
factual knowledge of man’s past, its ultimate purpose is to give us an understanding of the
processes involved in the growth, flowering and collapse of civilizations and the factors
which may be responsible for these.” (Linton, 1945c, p. 9)
    * “For the reconstruction of history, with its story of successes and failures, should be,
in the last analysis, the end and aim of archaeology.”                  (Mera, 1935, p. 33)
     “To reconstruct history, which is the main objective of archaeological study, the
archaeologist must. . . .” (Colton, 1942, p. 39)
     “In this brief paper we will attempt to reconstruct the history of the Mississippi
Cultures. .. .” (Bennett, J. W., 1943a, p. 34)
     “The archaeological objectives [of the Rainbow- BrilzesVorniment. Valley Expedition |
were directed toward the most complete reconstruction possible of the human history of
the region.” (Beals, Brainerd, Smith, 1945, p. 4)
     See also: Colton, 1943b, title; Holmes, 1919, pp. xvi, 2, 18.
     ™ “Tn anthropological parlance, the terms ‘history’ and ‘historical’ have, so far as I can
see, never been satisfactorily defined.” (Malinowski, 1944, p. 20)
     In the course of reading for this study, relatively few references have been found
dealing at any length with the relations of anthropology to history. Not one of the authors
was specifically an archeologist. See: Barnes, 1924; 1925, pp. 21, 34; 1936, p. 256; Boas,
1936; 1938, pp. 1, 5-6; Brinton, D. G., 1896b; Bury, 1906, pp. 46-47; Fellows, 1896;
Kroeber, 1923, pp. 5-6, 10; 1935; 1936, esp. pp. 327-333; 1943, pp. 294-295; Olmstead, 1927;
Rivers, 1920, esp. pp. 78-79; Teggart, 1919; Wallis, 1917; Wissler, 1923, pp. 246, 279.

    ®“The     anthropologist      seeks    to unite    all that   can    be known        respecting      man    into   a
comprehensive      science,    and to study     the innumerable          correlations     which       bind   the most
incongruous      actions and    thoughts    together   in harmony.”        (Mason,      1884, p. 367)
    “The    science      of anthropology,    in its widest    sense,     embraces     all the materials        bearing
on the origin and history of mankind.” (Munro, 1894, p. 885)
     “T use the term anthropology in the sense in which it had been adopted by this
association [the American Association for the Advancement of Science], that is, to include
the study of the whole of man, his psychical as well as his physical nature, and the products
of all his activities, whether in the past or in the present.” (Brinton, D. G., 1895, p. 241)
    “Anthropology         was defined to be the science of man, and included everything related
to man, his physical, intellectual psychologic             characteristics ; and        these     extended     through
all ramifications.” (Wilson, T., 1899, p. 332)
208

                                                                                (Beard, 1934, p. 219)
      “What, then, is this manifestation of omniscience called history?”
      See also: Linton, 1936b, title.
                                                                                        has
     Tinton for one, while maintaining that anthropology is the potential synthesizer,
                                                     no means the only discipline which has
also said in the same paper that “Anthropology is by
concerned   itself with the study   of man.”   (1945c,    p. 16)
                                                                                            c
     “Tf history is to reach its highest development it must surrender all individualisti
                                                                                    It must
aspirations and recognize that it is but one of several ways of studying mankind.
confess that, like geology, biology, and most other sciences, it is based on sister sciences,
that it can only progress with them, must lean largely on them for support, and in return
should repay its debt by the contributions which it makes to our general understanding
of our species.” (Rcbinson, 1912, p. 74)
     “Every science which deals with human phenomena is in a way an implement in this
great factory system, in which the past is welded together again.” (Shotwell, 1929, p. 596)
     “The ‘Study of Man’ is certainly a somewhat presumptuous, not to say preposterous,
label when applied to academic anthropology as it now stands. A variety of disciplines, old
and recent, venerable and new, deal also with inquiries into human nature, human handiwork,
and into the relations between human beings.” (Malinowski, 1944, p. 3)
    Langlois and Seignobos (1898, pp. 310ff.) say that Universal History is a collaboration.
Both Berr (1911) and Bury (1909, esp. p. 33) hold that to “reconstruct” history, data from
other disciplines than history must be used. Ware’s criticism of the New History (1940, esp.
p. 5-8) is that it attempted too much and was neither selective nor organized enough.

     “ “Our understandings of the world are still too fragmentary, still lacking that continuity
necessary to permit us to understand the role of Man on the earth. The solution of the
problem with which it is concerned, which touches at the same time philosophical history,
sociology, and natural history, must needs be preceded by the elucidation of a multitude of
other particular scientific questions. The philosophy of history will be the crowning of
human knowledge.” (Majewski, 1908, p. 20)
     “For the purposes of this study—not necessarily for others—it is legitimate to define
philosophy as a residual category. It is the attempt to achieve a rational cognitive under-
standing of human experience by methods other than those of empirical science.” (Parsons, T.,
1937, p. 21)
      “History deals always with the progress or decadence            of a unitary being which per-
sists as an individual in spite of changes; it never deals with a collection of sequent but
unrelated events. Unless this were the case, any fact would be of equal importance to the
historian with every other fact; selection can take place only with reference to a universal.”
(Sabine, 1906, p. 13)
      “The unity of any history is the creation of an artist, and is arrived at through the
selection from given data or materials of such facts as are in harmony with the artist’s con-
ception or purpose.” (Teggart, 1925, p. 40)
      “.. . any selection and arrangement of facts pertaining to any large area of history... .
is controlled inexorably by the frame of reference in the mind of the selector and arranger.”
(Beard, 1934, p. 227)
     “The idea of history only emerges with the search for certain connections, the essence of
which is determined by the value which we attach to them. It makes no difference whether we
think of a history which is the result of researches strictly critical in method or of sagas or
epics belonging to former phases of civilization.”       (Huizinga,   1936, p. 5)
      See also: Beard, 1935, esp. pp, 82-83; Croce, 1921, esp. Chap. 1; Pareto, 1935, Vol. I, p.
TAYLOR                          A STUDY      OF ARCHEOLOGY                                     209

318; Parsons, T., 1937, pp. 28-30; 1938. For a contrary view which, however, does not seem
to be sound in this particular regard, see: Mandelbaum, 1938.
     “““The more comprehensively, profoundly, penetratingly, and, in a word, truthfully,
historians deal with their themes, the more entitled are they to rank as historical philosophers.”
(Flint,   1893,   p. 13)
     “The philosopher, on the other hand, is burdened by the double task of weighing the
conclusions of all the sciences, and of taking into account, also, the personal data [of subject
and author] which every science officially omits and every philosophy tacitly builds on.”
(Schiller, 1934, p. 235)
     “Now has the work [Social and Cultural Dynamics], in its choice of materials, its
principles, methods and aims anything to do with what is called Cultural History? Of the
semi-historical disciplines which it resembles, it is nearest to what often is styled Philosophy of
History. Since almost all great sociological systems are a brand of philosophy of history,
and since most of the great philosophies of history are a sort of sociology of culture change,
I do not have any objection to the use of this name by anyone who fancies it to describe the
present work.” (Sorokin, 1937, p. x)
      Coulborn and Dubois agree with Sorokin and call his work a “philosophy of history”
(1942, p. 501). Coulborn (1941, p. 45) also identifies the writings of Toynbee, Spengler,
Ortega y Gasset, Pareto, and Croce as “philosophy of history.” See also: Giddings, 1922, esp.
p. 66.

     “c.. history par excellence, human history, what has happened within the sphere of
human agency and interests, the actions and creations of men .... or which have been pro-
duced by men. . . . History is all that man has suffered, thought, and executed—the entire
life of humanity—the whole movement of societies.’’ (Flint, 1893, p. 8)
     “Whatever history may or may not be, it always concerns itself with man.” (Robinson,
1912, p. 74)
    “All are agreed, for instance, that the term     ‘history’ should be limited to substantially
human affairs.’ (Shotwell, 1922, p. 5)
    “, .. while the name ‘historian’ is applied only to those scholars who devote themselves
to reconstructing the past of the human race.” (Salvemini, 1939, p. 4)

     * “Historiography : 1. The art or employment, or a work, of a historiographer; the writing
of history. 2. The study and criticism of the sources and development of history, as a branch
of knowledge.” (Webster’s New International Dictionary, 2nd ed., 1937)
     A list of writers who use the first meaning includes: Barnes, 1936, esp. pp. 251-260; Beard,
1935, pp. 86-87; Beard and Vagts, 1937, esp. pp. 461, 482; Burton, 1938; Childe, 1937, pp. 4ff.;
Cohen and Nagel, 1934, p. 325; Croce, 1933, p. 230; Hearnshaw, 1931, p. 776; Kroeber, 1944,
p. 23; Lynd, 1939, p. 131; Merton, 1936b, p. 157; Robinson, 1912, pp. 16, 47; Shotwell, 1929,
p. 596; Teggart, 1925, esp. Chap. III; Zilsel, 1941, pp. 572, 578.
      Only three sources have been discovered that use the second meaning: American His-
torical Association, 1945, p. 73, although on later pages in this same publication historiog-
raphy is used with the first meaning (see: pp. 80, 81, 87); Becker, C., 1938, p. 20; Meadows,
1944, p. 53.

      “6 Ueberweg designates two: objective, as the process of the development of nature and
spirit; subjective, as the investigation and writing (1872-1874, Vol. I, p. 5). Bernheim desig-
nates three meanings: events themselves, the art of writing, and Geschichtswissenschaft or
discipline (1903, pp. 2, 126). Shotwell designates two: the events; the record of events (1929,
p. 594), Hearnshaw designates three: actual course of events; narrative record; and enquiry
210

                          (1931, pp. 775-776).   Carl Becker   designates   two:   the events;     the
or learning by enquiry
                                                                                          three:
ideal series which is held in memory, i.e., the record (1932, p. 222). Steefel designates
the past itself, the record, the discipline (1937, p. 305).

     47 These levels are essentially those noted by Goldenweiser (1933b, p. 7), although he does
not mention the level of problem. Teggart, however, says: “Science is, fundamentally, a
method of dealing with problems, and the initial step in any scientific undertaking is the
determination of the problem to be investigated.” (1918, p. 1)
     “The facts now dead once lived; unless they have become alive to you you know them
not. The investigation of facts, the study of their relation, the reproduction of their form
and motion, these constitute history, and every great historical work must be judged by these
tests.’ (Guizot, quoted in Gooch, 1913, p. 190)
      “There seems to be just one qualification necessary: it must be that past viewed
historically, which means that the data must be viewed as part of the process of social
development, not as isolated facts. For historical facts are those which form a part of that
great stream of interrelation which is Time.” (Shotwell, 1922, p. 5)
      See also: Berr and Febvre, 1937, p. 363.

      *8“But if the life of every society belongs to history, much more       does the life of that
highest and sovereign society which we call a state or nation.”    (Arnold,    1842, p. 6)
     “The military and political course of a community with which history is chiefly en-
grossed. . . . Public office and influence—the making of history—. . . .” (Schouler, 1896,
pp. 29, 36)
     “Wars and the administration of public affairs are the principal subjects of history.”
(Gibbon, quoted in Rhodes, 1909, p. 126)
     See also: Gooch, 1913; Langlois and Seignobos, 1898; Nevins, 1938.

      * Barnes, 1925, pp. 5, 28; Dow, 1899; Eggleston, 1900; Gooch, 1913, esp. Chap. XXVIII;
Jameson, 1891; Kraus,      1937;   Langlois and Seignobos, 1898, p. 297ff.;         Pirenne,     1923;
Robinson, 1911; 1912;      1930;   Schlesinger, 1925; Simkovitch, 1929-1936;        Teggart,     1916;
Ware, 1940.

     ”“The third fallacy of common-sense sociology is the implicit assumption that any
group of social facts can be treated theoretically and practically in an arbitrary isolation
from the rest of the life of a given society. . . . This does not mean that it is not possible
to isolate such groups of facts for theoretic investigation or practical activity, but simply that
the isolation must come, not a priori, but a posteriori, in the same way as the distinction
between the normal and the abnormal. The facts must first be taken in connection with the
whole to which they belong, and the question of a later isolation is a methodological prob-
lem which we shall treat in a later part of this note... .” (Thomas and Znaniecki, 1918,
pp. 10, 11-12)
     “Indeed, the essential work of the historian is to bring these episodes to light, to show
the relations existing between events and in relating to explain them. Thus it appears that
history is the expository narration of the course of human societies in the past.” (Pirenne,
1931, p. 441)
      “History is an integrated narrative or description of past events or facts. . . .” (Nevins,
1938, p. 22)

     " History is “distinguished from    annals and chronicles, which simply relate facts and
events in strict chronological order”    (Webster’s New International Dictionary, 1926). See
also: Teggart, 1925, p. 17.
TAYLOR                          A STUDY        OF ARCHEOLOGY                                        211


    * “Fistorical analysis moves differently [from theoretical]. It notes not similarities among
discontinuous particulars, but contiguities of particulars in space and time. It desires to see
the observed occurrence as a part of a larger, unobservable, but still unitary occurrence.
Every natural occurrence, however small, has a temporal as well as a spatial dimension; and
in this way even observed occurrences are short histories. These short observed histories have
a historical context, they are parts of a larger but still particular spatiotemporal pattern; and
it is the historian’s purpose to reach, by hypothesis based on observed occurrences, a knowl-
edge of this larger history.” (Miller, 1939, pp. 6-7)
      See also: Coulborn, 1944, pp. 56-57.
    8 See: quotation from Miller in Note 52 above.
     “The rarity of recorded events in primitive life has helped to force anthropologists into
recognition of the forms or patterns of culture, and from this into a clear recognition of culture
as such. In short, they discovered culture. To be sure, this was long after intelligent historians
had known the fact; but these took it for granted and tended to deal with culture indirectly
or implicitly, whereas anthropologists became explicit and culture-conscious.’”’ (Kroeber, 1936,
p. 331)
    The editors of the Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, while giving the “anthropological
attitude” the first place among the contributions of anthropology, nevertheless state that the
concept of culture is “of first rate importance” and in fact note that the “principal positive
theoretical position” of anthropology in the first decade of the 20th century was the “glorifi-
cation of culture.” (Vol. I, pp. 202-203)
     Redfield notes that the concept of culture was developed at the hands of the anthro-
pologists. (1940, pp. 738-739)
   ©The articles of Leslie White,      while   designed   to clarify   different   problems,   will give
ample evidence of this contention.
     «¢     . on account of the uniqueness of cultural phenomena and their complexity nothing
will ever be found that deserves the name of a law excepting those psychological, biologically
determined characteristics which are common to all cultures and appear in a multitude of forms
according to the particular culture in which they manifest themselves.
     «, . . When I thought that these historical methods [acculturation and dissemination]
were firmly established I began to stress, about 1910, the problems of cultural dynamics, of
integration of culture and of the interaction between individual and society.” (Boas, 1936, ed.
1940, p. 311)

     Thus, the scientific quota in all anthropological work consists in the theory of culture,
with reference to the method of observation in the field and to the meaning of culture as
process and product.” (Malinowski, 1944, p. 5)
     The “process and product” of Malinowski may be equated with what Teggart called
“change” and “conditions” (1925, p. 105). Lesser (1939) has shown that, despite the dis-
claimer, the anthropologists have in fact abstracted and used “laws.”
     58Tt is agreed with Murdock (1932, p. 200) that anthropology and sociology both treat
of culture itself. But it is further held with Znaniecki (1934, pp. 95ff.) that sociology is not
the study of the full range of cultural phenomena.
     Abel (1930) denies an interest in culture and says that social life is entirely in terms of
inter-individual behavior. Ogburn (1937) is at great pains to show the importance of cul-
ture for sociology. Brown (1944) says that from a biological, cultural, and “human nature”
standpoint, anthropology and sociology are the same; he seems to imply that the difference
between them lies in the fact that the data of anthropology consist of the “primitive.”
212

                                                                                              of historiog-
      ® Caird recognizes Europe and the Mediterranean basin as within the scope
         but  claims   that,  outside  this  pale,  men  “had    no   history any   more   than herds of
raphy
cattle.” (1899, pp. 260-261)
      “Anthropology is the study of primitive peoples. . . . What anthropologists find in the
                                                                                             of custom, a
study of primitive people is a natural and well-nigh inexhaustible laboratory
great   workshop    in  which   to explore  the   major role  it  has  played  in the  life-history  of the
world.” (Benedict, 1931, p. 805)
     “If jt is possible to differentiate between anthropology and the allied science of
sociology, one would say that anthropology is more concerned with the simpler peoples.
whereas sociology coordinates both the simple and the complex civilizations, and studies the
principles which underlie them both.” (Driberg, 1932, p. 15)
      ce      . anthropologists   have taken   as their primary   fields the study of human        origins,
the classification of human varieties, and investigation of the life of the so-called “primitive”
peoples.” (Linton, 1936b, p. 4)
      “     the anthropologist has taken as his particular field the study of the languages and
cultures of nonliterate peoples .... of prehistoric cultures ... . and of human evolution.”
(Strong, 1936, p. 364)
      “Without either past, or a body of documents, how may one claim to an historian?”
 (Redfield, 1937b, p. 171)
      “The specific task as well as the real value of ethnology consist in the methodological
application of these means, not only to understand the conditions existing among the primitive
peoples today, but also to recognize in them witnesses and survivals of the oldest development
of mankind and thus to reach back over the epochs of written history .... in a word, to change
juxtaposition of culture circles into succession of culture layers.” (Schmidt, 1939, p. 13)
    © Benedict, 1934, pp. 16ff.; Goldenweiser, 1933a, esp. p. 132; Kroeber, 1923, p. 6; Linton,
1936b, pp. 4-5; Mead, 1928, pp. 7-8; 1930, pp. 3-4.
     * Davis, Gardener, and Gardener, 1941; Embree, 1944; Leighton, 1945; Lynd and Lynd,
1929, 1937; Powdermaker, 1939; Warner and Lunt, 1941; West, 1945.
     o« ... [the relation of ethnography of “primitives” and of social history] to social
practice is only mediate; they can help the practitioner to solve actual cultural problems only
to the degree that they help the scientist to understand actual cultural life.’ (Thomas and
Znaniecki, 1918, p. 18)
     “While nature in its historical pattern is everywhere individual and unique, certain aspects
or characters of historical fact can be repeated elsewhere; and it is these repeatable characters
 that constitute the structures defined by theoretical analysis. Yet the fact that these characters
 can be repeated elsewhere does not make them less instrinsic or proper to the historical
 developments bearing them; and this means that all structural pattern is ultimately rooted
 in particular historical fact.” (Miller, 1939, p. 9)
      Ellwood (1944, p. 14) calls cultural anthropology “fundamental to all the other social
 sciences” because culture dominates social life. While this would seem to be true, it still holds
 that historiography is basic to any historical discipline dealing, as it does, with actuality.

      “For example: Brinton, Crane, 1938, esp. Chap. I; Buckle, 1876; Cheney, 1924; Toynbee,
 1934-1939,

       “ Kroeber’s intellectual debt to Rickert is stated in his So-Called Social Science (1936, p.
 339ff.). A particular passage from Rickert may be noted in this special connection, however:
 “Empirical reality becomes nature when we regard it in terms of the universal; it becomes
 history when we regard it in terms of the particular individual.” (Rickert, 1896-1902, p. 227)
TAYLOR                               A STUDY        OF ARCHEOLOGY                                             213

      “Orthodox history still regards the comparative beyond its proper jurisdiction.” (Kroeber,
1943,
   p. 294)
     3      . as historians, our real task is with history, not with its application; but when
troubles come upon us, the question will always emerge—it will not down—whether it belongs
to the historian, even if not strictly as a historian, to find in all these facts and developments,
assuming them to be accurate, any lessons of value that may be practically useful.” (Mcllwain,
1937, p. 223)
     See also: Rickert, 18985 Znaniecki 1934, pp. 21ff. For other opinions, see: Collingwood,
Taylor, Schiller, 1922; Droyson, 1882, esp. p. 7.
     © “Hence it may be argued that the action of the individual wills is a determining and
disturbing factor, too significant and effective to allow history to be grasped by sociological
formulae. The types and general forms of development which the sociologist attempts to dis-
engage can only assist the historian in understanding the actual course of events.” (Bury,
1909,
   p. 38)
     “While historical knowledge to be scientifically valid must, therefore, be controlled by
classificatory and nomothetic knowledge, the latter is obviously dependent on _ historical
data. Not only is the study of particular systems and individual changes a necessary con-
dition of all inductive generalizations, but the ultimate significance of these generalizations is
that they help understand such particular systems and explain such individual changes as have
not yet been investigated.” (Znaniecki, 1934, p. 25)
      “Theoretical and historical analysis are, accordingly, coordinate methods in scientific
inquiry. They are equally essential, and neither is to be subordinated to the other.” (Miller,
1939,
   p. 27)
     “Ordinarily the business of history is the narration of a sequential series of events in their
connections or coherences, with culture as a context.
     “The anthropologist’s situation is essentially the reverse: he deals with culture as such,
in a context of history.” (Kroeber, 1944, p. 4)



                                               CHAPTER            3

      ® Kidder,   1915; Nelson,      1914;   Spier, 1917, 1918, 1919.
      See:     Who’s   Who in America,       1944-1945,   p. 1149; National Research        Council, 1940, p.
78.
      8 “The    Section   [dealing   with    Maya   archeology]       is engaged   in studying   the career     of
the Maya Indians, from the earliest times to the present. Its primary objective is of course
to learn the facts of Maya history.” (Kidder, 1934, p. 81)
     “The aim of the study of New World archaeology is to reconstruct       the history of the
Indians throughout both the Americas, and from the earliest times to the period when the
arrival of Europeans put a final stop to native development.” (Kidder, 1936a, p. 46)
     See also: Kidder, 1930c, p. 391; 1933, p. 81; Thompson, 1939a, p. 1.
     © “Rut shall we be able to digest our masses of raw data in such a way as to reach under-
standing of the all-important whys and wherefors of Maya history and by so doing contribute
toward comprehension of the infinitely complex interaction of those biological, environmental
and social factors which govern the evolution of man?” (Kidder, 1935b, p. 114)
     “Fuller knowledge of the Indian’s history can bring us nearer                     to understanding       the
laws of cultural evolution.” (Kidder, 1940a, p. 535)
     See also: Kidder, 1931b, p. 101; 1933, pp. 82-83; 1937c, p. 160.
214

     ™No provenience or ceramic association is provided for projectile points and knives
which constitute the bulk of the stone work; only one (odd) specimen out of 325 drills is
identified with ceramic period; nor are such data provided for awls which form the bulk
of the bone-work. Yet, in the same publication, Kidder says: “But specimens... . have also
suffered shameful                neglect. By this was meant, of course, that the study of specimens, which
naturally includes thinking about what they mean, has by no means kept pace with their
accumulation. Yet upon artifacts, their nature, their distribution and their position in the
ground, rests the entire study of archaeology; they constitute practically the only evidence we
shall ever have regarding that part of man’s career which is unrecorded, or insufficiently
recorded, by the written word. . . . We dig, or at least we ought to dig, for the purpose of
recovering facts to elucidate the history of vanished civilizations; and those facts should
obviously be made of record for the use of other students. Only by doing so can we build up
a corpus of information sufficiently large to permit valid generalization.” (1932a, p. 8)
    ™ The “major works” consist of the Publications (P) and Contributions (C); the “minor
works” of the Notes (N) and the Theoretical Approaches to Problems (T).

                                                                     Mayor    Works                  Minor       Works
Descriptive
  Reconnaissance                  and        brief   excavation    P-444, 543            NSS, 14, 32°57, 159
                                                                    C-8, 9, 15, 40, 41
  Sitemreportsmaes                     asc       towee oeeetiaeries P-477, 506
                                                                    C-35?
  Ceramicsae         ean ers                 coe    CO ee           C-5                  N-2, 15, 30, 35, 36, 37, 60
  Artifacts Spee eeepc uemey treens                       cis toa P-472                  INE     0    S169   1     0202s,   275
                                                                    C-16, 24, 26, 37       29, 31, 40, 47, 52, 54, 55
  Buildings          @yrsac.aen
                         oceicr. ote ee P-454
                                                                    Co75 17, 11940:
                                                                       27, 43
  ANN          QPNITESEY                onoccococoncoenouse P-471

Epigraphy,       Calendar, and Chronology                         ..P-437                NETS    1S    20.22"      2428s.
                                                                    Ca14    21, 220042     34, 38, 39, 45, 49, 50, 56, 58
                                                                                         T-2
Interpretive
  Relsion      Mette    we    ace       ee C-10                                          N-12,   19
  Ciiitiiralieint erences mae eentaean eee C-6, 11, 29, 36
  Mopical      “synthesisgrarectsqc.                 cw   cir tas ie Soa eee ete         N-61

    ™ Brainerd, 1940; Kidder, 1930a, p. 103; 1932b, p. 97; 1945b, p. 591; Roberts, H. B., 1931;
Smith and Kidder, 1943, pp. 162-163.
     * For a similar case, this time leaving reconnaissance for mound excavation, see Explora-
tions in the Motagua Valley, Guatemala. (Smith and Kidder, 1943)
     ™ Pollock says that the Casa Redonda was chosen because it was round, and round
structures are rare (1936a, p. 131). R. E. Smith says Structure A-I at Uaxactun was chosen
because of its several superimposed pyramids which gave a chance for pottery, burial, and
architecture sequence and also because of the prominent part it played in the group. (1937,
pp. 193, 196)
     A. L. Smith says that Structure A-XVIII at Uaxactun was of impressive height, one of
the oldest and one of the highest and best preserved; he says it was desired to know if it had
TAYLOR                               A STUDY       OF ARCHEOLOGY                                              215

been residential; it was also important to clear because Tikal was visible from its summit.
(1937, pp. 4-5)
     Trik says Temple XXII at Copan was selected because the main room contains one of
the finest compositions of Maya sculpture. (1939, p. 87)
      At Benque    Viejo, Thompson       stated his intention       to be the bridging of the ceramic gap
between Uaxactun, San Jose, and other sites (1942a, p. 1). At San Jose, his purpose was to
attack a small site which he thought woud prove to be more typical and more in keeping
with the more recent tendeneies in history, which decry pomp and circumstance; also such a site
was   thought to provide       better opportunities of getting data on every facet not destroyed.
(1939a, p. 1)
    Smith and Kidder say that San Agustin excavations                       were instituted because the site
showed long occupation and trade with Guatemala and                         Honduras and also because the
remains were of a type not previously reported from the Maya area. (1943, p. 109)
     Ruppert says that the Mercado at Chichen Itza was attacked because it was a type of
structure not excavated        before and because it presented new              features not encountered   else-
where. (1943, p. 229)

      ® Yet Kidder once said: “The museum attitude, in other words the valuation of an ob-
ject for what it looks like instead of for what it tells, has been a most serious brake upon the
wheels of archaeological progress, for archaeology is a historical discipline, it seeks to recon-
struct the past of peoples who have left no written records, and its documents are the material
remains left by vanished populations. The selection from such remains of a few pieces of
outstanding    appearance,     to the neglect of everything         which    is not handsome     or unusual     is
therefore a perfectly fatal perversion of emphasis.”         (1932a, pp. 6-7)

    *® “Most of us have worked, I think, too much in restricted fields; and in those fields we
have perhaps devoted ourselves too exclusively to site excavation. The comparative methods
of ethnography might well be given greater consideration by archaeologists. Nordenskiéld’s
results achieved on the basis of the scanty South American                    data, show how much can be
accomplished by such means.” (Kidder, 1936c, p. 146)

     ™ Kidder, 1931b, p. 101; 1932b, p. 91; 1933, p. 82; 1934, p. 81; 1939, p. 235. Kidder and
Thompson, 1938, p. 494; Morley, 1943—in the first nine pages, the “rise and fall” motif is mem-
tioned four times.
      8 “Tf the archaeologist, however, is forced, or forces himself, to digest and publish his
results, the specimen-complex still vitiates his work, for he chooses for description and
particularly for illustration his handsomest articles (which like as not are far from repre-
sentative) or his unique finds (which may very well be the handiwork of the village idiot)
and leaves utterly out of account the common, everyday, typical tools and vessels which,
properly classified and compared with similar objects from other areas or other chronological
horizons, alone can supply him with data as to the cultural relationships and cultural changes
which should be the real objective of his excavations. He still acts as a connoisseur rather
than a student of prehistory.” (Kidder, 1932a, pp. 7-8)
     Compare also: “One must recognize that the manifestations of the Maya hierarchal
religion—glyphs, stone temples, stone sculpture, and, probably, ball courts—are due to
extraneous    influences,    and   it is the   underlying   local    cultures    which   must   be compared.”
(Thompson,      1939a, p. 6)
     ” “The program of the Section [of Aboriginal American History] therefore falls naturally
into two parts, the one concerning itself with events and social conditions, the other with the
ecology of the area in which those events took place and those conditions arose. The ultimate
216

                                                                                     , a true
aim of the research is to paint, in the light of these two categories of information
                                                                                       7
historical picture.” (Kidder, 1934, p. 81)
      A study of Carnegie publications fails to uncover            any account of the “social conditions”
mentioned in the above statement. Events remain the only results.
     ® Compare      Kidder’s   “history”   of   Pecos     pueblo    (1932a,    pp.   1-4)   with   Thompson’s
“surveys.”
      8 “The investigations have added to our understanding of the intellectual achievements of
the Maya in mathematics and astronomy, have served to point out strategic areas for intensive
excavation and, most important of all, have aided in establishing upon the sure foundation of
a dated chronology, the sequence of the principal categories of Maya remains. But proper
utilization of these data, in other words their interpretation in terms of history, can be made
only in the light of accurate information as to the biological nature of the population concerned
and as to the environment in which they lived. These factors form respectively the raw
material of and the setting for the course of historical events, and without understanding
of them it is impossible to reach valid historical conclusions.”              (Kidder,   1930b, p. 145)
     “Most recently, the Institution has sponsored a survey of the entire range of Maya
history, a study supplemented by research upon the varied environmental factors which
throughout the centuries have influenced the career of the Maya and their Spanish con-
querors. This investigation throws light upon events in the pre-Columbian New World. It has
even wider bearings upon general anthropological theory.” (Kidder, 1940b, p. 262)
     ® “Their work upon the glyphs ... . has served to define the main currents of Maya
history and to place in their relative order the principal groups of cities.’ (Kidder, 1930a,
p. 101)
     “,.. ceramic documents, so precious for the reconstruction of Maya history.” (Kidder,
1935b, p. 123)
    The implications       that “Maya history” means “Maya chronology” are very apparent
in these statements;       it certainly cannot mean “historiography” in the sense of a full
cultural context.

      * See also: Kidder, 1933, pp. 82-83; 1940a, p. 535.
     “ “Southwestern archaeology has long occupied a prominent place in North American
anthropological researches.” (Roberts, 1935, p. 507)
     “Of greatest interest to the anthropologist, the student of man, are the people who live
here now ... . those people who were found here by the Conquistadores . . . . and those people
whose customs and industries are known least of all because of their great age and the lack
of written   accounts   concerning   them.”     (Haury,    1936a, p. 15)

     * The practice of quantifying and identifying the source material of rare objects and the
types having few examples is found throughout his reports, e.g., 1929b, Shell Ornaments,
p. 142; 1930, Pipes, p. 153; 1932, Bone Fleshing-tools, p. 137; 1940, Bone Rings, p. 116.
     “ A similar case is that of the cupboard at the Village of the Great Kivas (1932, p. 31);
“several bone and stone implements” were found in it, but Roberts says nothing as to their
nature. He merely makes a comparison to a corner doorway at Chaco and suggests that such
cupboards must have been derived from such features.
      * An indication of what he did intend may be had from the following quotations: “The
bulk of the pottery described in the following pages came from pit house and jacal sites.
Only a small collection was obtained from the pueblo. The latter is sufficient, however, to
show the distinct difference between        the two groups.”        (1931, p. 119)
TAYLOR                           A STUDY      OF ARCHEOLOGY                                      217

    “It [the building of dooryard terraces] does not seem to have been peculiar to any
one group or horizon and has no period or cultural significance.” (1932, p. 41)

    * “In several cases these [superimposed graves] had statigraphic significance from the
standpoint of the sequence of types of artifacts and the information thus obtained checked
with that from the tests made in the mounds and from the pillars in the house pits.” (1940,
p. 135)

     For other examples, ste: Webb and Funkhouser, 1929a, pp. 706ff.; Webb, 1938, pp.
72-74; Webb, 1941, pp. 253ff. For detailed sequences of events, see: Webb and Elliott, 1942,
pp. 488-491; Webb, 1943a, pp. 515-518.

     "In the Pickwick Basin report (Webb and De Jarnette, 1942) we have the following:
Reference to waterfowl, which are migratory and therefore seasonal and whose presence in
certain young or adult forms might indicate season (p. 308); references to turtles and ground
hogs which hibernate (pp. 146, 308); references to deer and other animals which, if found in
a young or immature state, would indicate season (pp. 146, 308); references to floods, low
and high water periods, which might be correlated with known seasonal fluctuations of the
river (pp. 101, 353, 380); reference to embryonic mollusks (p. 369); references which postu-
late discontinuous occupation to account for reversals of usual stratigraphy (p. 310) and
relative scarcity of certain food mollusks (p. 380); reference which states the intermittent
character of the occupation without going into the above lines of possibly supporting
evidence (p. 383).
     The following series of quotations presents a problem with regard to an apparent absence
of physical stratigraphy in the Wheeler Basin sites coupled with several unrelated ceramic
traditions. The postulation of a seasonal and exclusive occupation of these sites by varying
and alternating groups of people might be found to fit other data and give a lead for further
study. The condition of the published evidence, however, prevents pursuing this hypothesis.
“There was little data presented which suggested the possibility of stratigraphy at the sites. . . .”
(Griffin, 1939, p. 127)
      “As the pottery was examined it became more and more evident that there were a number
of distinct ceramic traditions belonging to several culturally unrelated horizons. It is recognized
that a laboratory student is in no position to arbitrarily assign cultural levels to sites which
seem to yield little data showing that such levels were present. For example, if the women
who made the shell-tempered pottery at Site Lu° 86 lived there at the same time as those
who made the sand and fiber tempered pottery one would expect to find some evidence of that
cultural contact in the sherds. There is no such evidence.” (Ibid, p. 128)
     “These four wares [from Wheeler Basin] are distinct and do not show cultural inter-
mixture. Their distribution, cultural associations, and chronological positions are not the
same.” (Ibid., p. 165)
      "<“Tn the light of the many recent excavations and from intensive laboratory analysis
of the artifact material, it has become increasingly evident to most archaeologists that a
generic trait list of the type used in this report for comparison with other sites is hardly
adequate for an accurate synthesis of the aboriginal group under study. For a comprehensive
report on archaeological findings it seems that the minutiae, which might appear to be
insignificant and boring, after all, should necessarily be considered. This is equally true for
even the beginnings of a reconstruction of the habits, customs, daily life, and possible ap-
pearance of the peoples responsible for the remains. Hence, it is hoped that the descriptive
trait list that follows will prove of more assistance to other workers than a more generalized
list.” (Webb and Funkhouser, 1940, p. 225, italics mine)
218

                                                                                   so few artifact
     “While considerable additional evidence on skeletal remains was secured,
[sic] were obtained that a listing of traits is of no special significance.
     “The traits occurring at this site will be integrated in the final Adena trait list to be pre-
pared on Adena in Kentucky” (Webb, 1943b, p. 604, italics mine). And this is in the face
of a statement that “Adena potsherds and other broken artifact [sic] show that the debris
of a thin and perhaps small village midden was scraped up and used to build this mound.
  pe     Ds OO)
       ” “Since archaeology is a historical discipline which aims to reconstruct the past. . . .
                                                                                                 ”




(1943, p. 11)
     “A set of arbitrary terms is offered [by the “McKern” classification] which implies a
certain connection betwéen archaeological units and provides an essential organization of the
data to be utilized in the eventual reconstruction of the life and historic development of
the peoples who      inhabited the area.”     (1943, pp. 336-337)
     “The primary historical method to be employed in a reconstruction of the past life of an
ethnological unit is that of archaeology.” (1944b, p. 359)
     "Tn his Additional Hopewell Material from Illinois (1941), for example, he has listed the
zoological identifications of shells but has failed to indicate their sources, whether local
or foreign, from what coast or waterway (p. 185-186); perforated animal teeth are noted but
no identifications       are made,     the rubric   of “perforated   teeth”   seeming   to satisfy   Griffin’s
needs (pp. 186, 206). In describing a figurine, he says: “A loin cloth, similar to that on one
of the Turner figurines, is the only piece of covering on the body”               (p. 210); which Turner
figurine, what sort of a loin cloth seems not to interest him.
     No analysis is made of Barker’s extensive zoological materials from sites along the Illinois
River.    (Griffin and    others,    1941)
      “Bone beads were always present in the graves containing artifacts, and they were com-
mon in the village site. Some have incised lines forming various patterns” (1943, p. 43).
Nothing is mentioned as to the nature of these designs, so that no correlation, if any actually
exists, can be worked out between design, grave type, other grave goods, sex of interment,
location in site, etc.
      In one of his publications (1937c, p. 54) Griffin says: “I tried to separate things which
I thought would be significant. For example, the use of bone awls is a trait which could
be broken up into subdivisions such as turkey metatarsal awls. Then I also included notched
turkey metatarsal awls because at all five sites a certain percentage of awls made from that
bone were notched. These became determinants of equal value for the Fort Ancient culture,
but in a larger cultural division we may find them relatively unimportant.” That these
notched awls might have had an association which would indicate their cultural significance,
or which might make their value for comparative purposes even greater, seems not to have
concerned Griffin. Apparently he has not himself analyzed their provenience and association to
arrive at conclusions, either positive or negative, upon this point. It is enough for him that
notched awls can be compared with notched awls. In his “exhaustive and comprehensive”
work on the Fort Ancient Aspect, he continues to regard notched awls as purely comparative
features and evidently has made no attempt to look for the possible cultural significance of
this specialized artifact.
      * “Though it is true that both the Iroquois and the Fort Ancient people utilized many
bone tools having shapes in common, there also are distinct differences in the shapes, so that
if the bone-implement assemblage from sites of the two cultures were laid side by side it would
be possible to distinguish between them. For example, one of the common tools of the Fort
Ancient Aspect is the bone beamer, or drawshave, which is decidely rare in Iroquoian sites.
...- On the other hand, bone harpoons are representative of Iroquoian sites, particularly those
in the eastern division, whereas they are very rare at Fort Ancient sites, appearing only at
TAYLOR                           A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                            219

Madisonville, where they are not the same as the Iroquoian type” (1943, pp. 231-232). How
can the significance of this difference be understood, or even compared, without investigating
whether the environment might have had a limiting effect upon harpoons in the country
of the Fort Ancient sites, or whether as a whole the Iroquois remains point to a stronger
fishing complex, or whether other evidence indicates a strong wood-working complex in Fort
Ancient sites, etc., etc. Merely to compare one artifact type with another on a descriptive
level is to lose or obscure much of the evidence.
     * “Comparison between components and cultural divisions should be made on the basis
of the total traits as represented in the respective lists of the components and divisions, and
it actually matters little how   these traits are arranged.”    (1943, p. 335)
      * Ritchie has also noted this when he said: “What, for instance, is the ‘hair-spreader,’
often referred to as a characteristic of the Fort Ancient Aspect, but nowhere, so far as I can
tell, either described or illustrated?” (1945b, p. 400)
      “ “Such a method of cultural comparison [trait lists and percentages of trait concurrence
between sites] will enable American archaeology to divorce itself from subjective general
statements such as ‘high and low cultures,’ and substitute an objective, detailed, trait for
trait comparison.” (1935, p. 5)
      “This analysis [discussion of traits on his trait lists and their comparables in other classi-
ficatory units] represents what might be called the more objective statement of the character-
istics of the cultural content of the Baum Focus and its interrelationships with other groups.”
(1943, p. 69)
    as    . and after having prepared       this report in what     I choose to term         an objective
manner... .” (1943, p. 303)
    “A trait list offers a recounting in a fairly objective form of the material remains               of
the inhabitants of the site excavated.” (1943, p. 340)
    **For example, in Griffin’s paper, An Analysis of the Fort Ancient             Culture     (1935), he
designates two types of plain bone beads, one type short and the other long. However, neither
bone tubes nor bone or antler pendants are subdivided; their dimensions are neither recorded
nor classified. Since there are no reasons given for this differential treatment, Griffin can
hardly claim that the method is objective. Somehow judgments have been made, and, what
is more, they have been made without giving the bases upon which they rest. Griffin, how-
ever, does give some explanation: “In selecting the traits [for the trait lists] a good deal
of the reliability of the traits an individual selects depends upon his archaeological experience.
From the literature and after visiting the Ohio State Museum, I tried to separate things
which I thought would be significant” (1937c, p. 54). This is an explanation, but it hardly
indicates the objectivity claimed for the trait lists.
     “When foci are combined into the more generalized unit called an aspect a personal
[Griffin evidently shies away from using the word subjective] conception of the important
features is introduced and individual elements are selected and recombined in a pattern which,
in a sense, never actually existed.” (1943, p. 205)
    “The     time and effort expended     in trying to determine     the elements     held in common
throughout the Woodland pattern        (which   is a valuable    abstraction     but not an historical
entity)... .” (1945b, p. 407)
     1 4n Analysis of the Fort Ancient Culture (1935). “The one serious difficulty en-
countered in attempting to identify the Fort Ancient culture with the. . . . In other words.
cultural forces influenced the Fort Ancient peoples from all directions, so in seeking to
identify them, I should look for a people, tribe or tribes, who were in a sense marginal to
both the southern and northern areas” (1937b, p. 276). Here he is looking for a tribe, or
tribes, which possessed a pattern of culture that “never actually existed.”
220

                                                                                                aid
     “Tt is the purpose of this paper to present some of these data in the belief that it will
                                                                                      prehistory.”
in the understanding of the possible place of the Adena culture in Ohio Valley
(1942, p. 345)
     The phrase “Fort Ancient culture”          is used in many    places in The Fort Ancient Aspect
(1943), eg., pp. 5, 193, 195, 197.

      In    The Archaeological Remains of the Chiwere Sioux (1937a), he makes the effort to
correlate a taxonomic unit, the Oneota Aspect, with a group of tribes linguistically connected,
the Chiwere Sioux. He finds a “high probability of correlation.”
     In An Interpretation of Siouan Archaeology in the Piedmont of North Carolina and
Virginia (1945a), he uses the term “Fort Ancient culture” several times in his attempt to indi-
cate the cultural position of remains attributed to the eastern Siouan tribes relative to such
“prehistoric cultures.” (p. 329)
      12   “The   close cultural   connection   between     the Baum   site and   the Gartner   site was
recognized by Mills and other students of Ohio archaeology and is graphically presented in
Tables VII-XIV, listing the non-pottery traits. The two sites together have a total of 123
different traits of which they have ninety-eight, almost 80 percent, in common.”           (1943, p. 65)
     #3 “Qur inability to connect the prehistoric with the historic is a stumbling block to a
sound reconstruction of aboriginal culture history in the State.” (Griffin and others, 1941,
p. 49)

      ** “There are at least two valid approaches to a clearer understanding of the prehistory
of the area under discussion. The first is a classification of cultures on the basis of their
determinant traits.    ... The second approach is to determine the ethnological relationship of
the archaeological cultures.” (1937c, p. 48)
      “Included in this monograph is a series of chapters in which the place of the Fort
Ancient Aspect in its cultural setting is discussed. In the chapter entitled ‘Speculations’ are
set forth several interpretations concerning cultural affiliations. . . . Another chapter gives
consideration to the possible historic connection between the Fort Ancient Aspect and known
linguistic or tribal groups. Other chapters are devoted to comparisons with other cultural
units and areas and include a short statement upon the probable chronological position of
the Fort Ancient Aspect.” (1943, p. 6)
      The series of chapters on the “cultural setting” I take to be the chapters describing the
various sites or components, the summaries of which are purely comparative and do not
synthesize any of the cultural data into a context. Thus it is seen that the stated result of the
volume is entirely comparative with an eye to the cultural and chronological position and the
ethnologic connections. The chapter on “The Geographical Background” is a somewhat
gratuitous inclusion which is not made use of in the succeeding pages.

                                            CHAPTER           4
      ™ Abel, 1930; Bain, 1937, 1942; Benedict, 1931; Bernard, 1925, 1930; Bidney, 1942, 1944;
Bierstedt, 1938; Blumenthal, 1936, 1937a, 1937b, 1938a, 1938b, 1940; Boas, 1932; Bowdery,
1941; Case, 1927; Choukas, 1936; Denness, 1942; Dollard, 1939; Ellwood, 1944; Ford, 1939,
1942; Frank, 1940, 1943; Gillin, 1939, 1944; Goldenweiser, 1929; Harlan, 1944; Hart and
Pantzer, 1925; Kluckhohn, 1941; Kluckhohn and Kelly, 1944; Linton, 1945a; Lynd, 1939, pp.
19ff.; Malinowski, 1936, 1939, 1941; Marett, no date; Merton, 1936a; Miller and Dollard,
1941, esp. p. 5; Monachesi, 1937; Murdock, 1932, 1940; Maclver, 1931; Ogburn, 1937;
Roheim,     1943; Sapir, 1924, 1927; Sorokin,       1943;    Stern, 1929;   Sutherland   and Woodward,
1940, pp. 15-21; Warden,       1936, pp. 12-13, 25, 32-34, 62, 101; White, L., 1940; Wissler, 1913,
1916; Woodward, 1936.
TAYLOR                              A STUDY        OF ARCHEOLOGY                                                  221


                                                CHAPTER           5
     * The following is an introductory bibliography to the subject of typology and classifi-
cation based upon the works which have influenced my own treatment of this topic:
     Allport, 1939; Becker, H., 1940; Bennett, J. W., 1943c; Black and Weer, 1936; Brew,
1946, pp. 32-66; Byers, 1941; Chamberlain, 1897; Cole and Deuel, 1937, pp. 207-223; Colton,
1939, pp. 5-22, 1943a; Creighton, 1913, pp. 81ff.; Croizat, 1941; Cutter, 1939; Davenport
and Blankinship, 1898; Deuel, 1935; Driver and Kroeber, 1932; Fairbanks, 1938, 1941;
Finkelstein, 1937; Gorodzov, 1933; Guthe, 1936; Henderson, 1935, p. 109; Hsu, n.d.; John-
son, 1937; Kluckhohn and Reiter, eds., 1939, pp. 151-162; Kluver, 1925; Krieger, 1940, 1944;
Kroeber,     1940a;   Lundberg,   1940;   McKern,     1933,   1937,    1938,   1939,    1940,   1942,   1943,   1944;
McKern, Deuel, Guthe, 1933; Mead, 1939; Osgood, 1942, pp. 22-25; Roberts, 1937; Rouse,
1939, 1944; Steward, 1941, 1942, 1944; Tallgren, 1937; Vaihinger, 1925.
       *““ T wish to express my thanks to Dr. A. Wetmore, Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution
and then Director of the United States National Museum, and to Mr. Frank M. Setzler, Head
Curator of Anthropology of the latter Museum, for permission to use the unpublished findings
of the Museum’s 1940-1941 Coahuila Expedition, of which I was Director. Although final
analysis may possibly modify the figures presented here, it is not expected that the relation-
ships pertinent to this discussion will be changed.
     **8 The same vewpoint is expressed when he suggests “‘a trial of the method developed by
Kroeber and Driver for handling ethnographic data. Applied to archaeology, it would be
sounder statistical procedure and would yield more reliable results” (1941, p. 367). He then
refers to Kroeber’s     article, ‘Statistical   Classification”   (1940a).

       *° Webster’s   New    International      Dictionary    (1937)      gives   the     following     definitions:
Affinal: “Related by marriage; from the same source.” Correlative: “Having, indicating, or
involving, a reciprocal relation; of the nature of correlates; reciprocally or mutually related;
conjoint. . . .” Legatary: “Of, pertaining to, or being, a legacy.” A legacy is defined in its
second meaning as “Something coming from an ancestor or predecessor. . . .”


                                                CHAPTER           6
       “° “Nothing pertaining to the intangible aspects of life can be rescued with the help of
the spade. Thus we may learn about skeletal types, about implements and utensils used,
about the steps in their manufacture; but no information is forthcoming to tell us about
languages, customs, beliefs.” (Boas, 1938, p. 2)
     “An archaeologist may recover the material but not the substance of aboriginal artifacts.
The exact meaning        of any particular object for the living group                  or individual     is forever
lost, and the real significance or lack of importance of any object in an ethnological sense has
disappeared by the time it becomes a part of an archaeologist’s catalogue of finds.” (Griffin,
1943, p. 340)
     “Archaeology, or course, is limited not only to consideration of the material aspects
of culture, but also to those of its manifestations which have produced imperishable remains.”
(Kidder and Thompson, 1938, p. 495)
     “Prehistory reveals only material phenomena, and only part of them. . . . In short, it
determines accurately certain phases of technology and nothing else.” (Lowie, 1937, p. 22)
       “This insufficiency of prehistory for establishing the intellectual culture must be all the
more     emphasized. . . .” (Schmidt, 1939, p. 299)
     “since archaeological remains illustrate only the arts and crafts, the material culture of
a people. .. .”” (Speck, 1935, p. 7)
222

                                                                                   of one sherd. Further-
     41 “Tp other words, in 1937, Colton set up a new type on the basis
                   one  year  after  Haury   had  published   a usable    descriptio n of Mogollon Red-
more, he did this
                                                                  he  has  already   clogged the literature
on-Brown. Now in 1941, he withdraws the type, although
                     ,  which   later  turns  out  mot  to  be  a   new    type,  and   asks us to accept
with his description
eleven more    new    types instead!”    (Rinaldo   and Martin,    1941, p. 656)

      122-The site referred to here is CM 79 at Piedras de Lumbre in central Coahuila, Mexico.
      138] wish to thank Professor Donald Scott, Director of the Peabody Museum of Harvard
University, for permission to examine and use the material in the Palmer Collection. The
burial bundle in the National Museum is from Coyote Cave (CM 88 in the general Coahuila
survey); it apparently is one of “2 or more mummies left with Galindo and sent to the
U.S.N.M. by Ed. Palmer,” U.S.N.M. accession 9462, cat. 45581. I wish to thank Dr. Wetmore
and Mr. Setzler for permitting me to examine and use this material.

      44 These specimens are from the Emerson Collection at the Peabody Museum of Harvard
University. I wish to thank Professor Scott for permission to examine and use this material.
The sites, as they have been redesignated in the general Coahuila survey, are: CM 92 (Cave
B1), CM 93 (Cave B2), CM 95 (Cave B4), CM 96 (Spring Cave), CM 97 (Cave 1), CM
98 (Cave 2).
     u4a At the Annual Meeting of the American Anthropological Association held at Albu-
querque, December 28-31, 1947, Dr. Colton presented a paper containing many of the ideas
included in this example. His conclusions were arrived at independently and completely
unbeknown to me.
      ™ See: Guernsey, 1931, p. 112; Roberts, 1929, p. 14; 1932, p. 16; Setzler, 1935, pp. 109-
110; Smith, V. J., 1931, p. 69; 1932; 1933, pp. 63ff.; Zingg, 1939, 1940.
      “6 Another     and equally influential    reason   for conducting     this particular   investigation
was to provide a large amount           of quantitative data with which to try the applicability for
archeology of the statistical maneuver known as the Poisson sampling test (Simpson and
Roe, 1939, pp. 78-83). This experiment has not yet been carried out, so that conclusions are
not yet available.

      ™'T am indebted to Harald A. Rehder, Assistant Curator, Division of Molluscs, Depart-
ment of Biology, U. S. National Museum,             for identification of the shells.
      “In   many     months   of tramping the mountains         and deserts of Coahuila, I have seen
only one living specimen of Humboldtiana. The location was in a relatively well-watered and
well-vegetated, and therefore most exceptional, canyon directly opposite the canyon of Fright-
ful Cave. None has been found in the latter area or in any other, although search has been made.
      i,There is a very small, scrubby pifion tree within some 500 meters of Frightful Cave,
but it is an isolated example and is growing against the cliff face where more moisture
collects than elsewhere. The nearest growth of pifion is at the top of the mountain, very much
higher and at least three miles away by tortuous foot travel.
       T wish to thank Dr. D. D. Brand, Chairman of the Department of Anthropology, Uni-
versity of New Mexico, for permission to use these data which were gathered at the
University’s Field Session at Chaco Canyon in 1939. Mr. F. M. Setzler was Archeologist in
Charge, and I was Assistant Archeologist with immediate supervision of the excavations whose
results are described here. This account will have to do only with the details of room
construction.
    ™ The figures of Table 6 are taken from the following sources: Bryan, 1931; Cosgrove
and Cosgrove, 1932; Fewkes, 1915, 1916, 1923, 1924.
                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABEL, T.
     1930     Is a Cultural      Sociology   Possible?    American   Journal   of Sociology,   Vol.
          XXXV, pp. 739£752.
ADAIR, JAMES
      1775 History of the American             Indians.   S. C. Williams,      ed., Johnson    City,
            Tennessee,   1930.
AGASSIZ, LOUIS
     1840 Etudes sur les Glaciers. Neuchatel.
ALLPORT, F. H.
     1939      Rule and Custom as Individual Variations of Behavior Distributed upon
            a Continuum of Conformity. American Journal of Sociology, Vol. XLIV,
            pp. 897-921.
AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY
    1820 Archaeologia Americana.             Transactions and Collections, Vol. I.
AMERICAN HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION
     1945     Guide to the American Historical Review. Annual Report of 1944, Vol. I,
            Bivdle
AMSDEN, CHARLES
     1930     What is Clockwise? American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XXXII, pp. 579-
        580.
ANDREWS, E. W.
     1943   The Archaeology of Southwestern Campeche. Contributions to American
         Anthropology and History, Vol. VIII, pp. 1-100. Carnegie Institution of Wash-
         ington.
ANONYMOUS
     1718-1747    Vetvsta Monvmenta: quae ad rerum brittanicarum memoriam con-
         servandam antiqvariorum Londini sumptu svo edenda cvravit. London.
ANONYMOUS
     1800 A Copy of the Royal Charter and Statutes of the Society of Antiquaries
         of London; and of Orders and Regulations Established by the Council of the
         Society. London.
ANONYMOUS
     1899 Obituary notice of D. G. Brinton. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. I,
         p. 764.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF AMERICA
     1880 First Annual Report of the Executive Committee.
     1881-1890 Papers, American Series, Vols. I-V.
     1882-1890 Papers, Classical Series, Vols. I-III.
     1885 Journal of American Archaeology and of the History of the Fine Arts,
         Vol. I.
ARNOLD, THOMAS
     1842 Lectures on Modern History. Oxford.
                                                223
224


ATWATER, CALEB
     1820 Description of the Antiquities Discovered in the State of Ohio and Other
         Western States. Transactions and Collections, Vol. I. American Antiquarian
             Society.
BAIN, READ
     1937 Technology          and State   Government.     American   Sociological Review,   Vol.
             II, pp. 860-874.
      1942     A Definition     of Culture.   Sociology   and Social Research,   Vol. XXVII,
             pp. 87-94.
BARNES, H. E.
     1924 Some Contributions of Anthropology to History. Journal of Social Forces,
             Vol. II, pp. 362-373.
      1925      The New History and the Social Studies. New York.
      1936      History—Its Rise and Development. Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. XIV,
             pp. 205-264.
BARTON, B. S.
      1797 New Views of the Origin of the Tribes and Nations of America. Phila-
          delphia.
BEALS, R. L., G. W. BRAINERD, and w. SMITH
      1945 Archaeological Studies in Northeast Arizona. University of California
          Press, Berkeley.
BEARD, C. A.
      1934 Written History as an Act of Faith. American Historical Review, Vol.
         XXXIX, pp. 219-229.
     1935 That Noble Dream. /bid., Vol. XLI, pp. 74-87.
BEARD, C. A., and A. VAGTS
     1937 Currents of Thought in Historiography. /bid., Vol. XLII, pp. 460-483.
BECKER, CARL
     1932 Everyman His Own Historian. /bid., Vol. XXXVII, pp. 221-236.
     1938 What is Historiography? Jbid., Vol. XLIV, pp. 20-28.
BECKER, HOWARD
     1940 Constructive Typology in the Social Sciences. American Sociological Review,
             Vol. V, pp. 40-55.
BECKWITH, E. G.
     1855 Report of Explorations for a Route for the Pacific Railway on the Line
         of the 41st Parallel. Survey for Railroad from the Missouri to the Pacific,
             Vol. II. Washington.
BEERS, H. A.
     1901 A History of English Romanticism in the Nineteenth Century. New York.
BELTZ, R.
      1927      Nordischer Kreis. In: Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte, Max Ebert, ed., Vol.
             IX. Berlin.
BENEDICT,      RUTH
      1931  The Science of Custom. In: The Making               of Man, V. F. Calverton, ed.
          New York,
      1934 Patterns of Culture. New York.
TAYLOR                        A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 225


BENNETT, J. W.
     1943a A History of the Mississippi Cultures. The Wisconsin Archeologist, n.s.
            Vol. XXIV, pp. 33-42.
     1943b Recent Developments in the Functional Interpretation of Archaeological
          Data. American Antiquity, Vol. IX, pp. 208-219.
     1943c Some Comments on Colton’s “Principle of Analogous Types.” American
          Anthropologist, n's. Vol. XLV, pp. 637-641.
     1944a The Interaction of Culture and Environment in the Smaller Societies.
          Ibid., Vol. XLVI, pp. 461-478.
     1944b     Middle American Influences on Cultures of the Southeastern United
          States. Acta Americana, Vol. II, pp. 25-50.
BENNETT, W. C.
     1945 Interpretations of Andean Archeology. Transactions, Ser. II, Vol. VII,
            pp. 95-99. New York Academy of Sciences.
BERNARD, L. L.
     1925 A Classification       of Environments.   American   Journal   of Sociology, Vol.
            XXXI, pp. 318-332.
     1930     Culture and Environment. Journal of Social Forces, Vol. VIII, pp. 327-334.
BERNHEIM, ERNST
     1903    Lehrbuch der Historischen Methode und der Geschichtsphilosophie, 3rd
          and 4th eds. Leipzig.
BERR, HENRI
     1911    La Synthese en Histoire, Essai Critique et Théorique. Paris.
BERR, HENRI, and L. FEBVRE
     1937. History. Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. VI, pp. 357-368.
BIDNEY, DAVID
     1942    On the Philosophy of Culture in the Social Sciences. Journal of Philosophy,
          Vol. XXXIX, pp. 449-457.
     1944 On the Concept of Culture and Some Cultural Fallacies. American Anthro-
          pologist, n.s., Vol. XLVI, pp. 30-44.
BIERSTEDT, ROBERT
     1938 The Meaning of Culture. Philosophy of Science, Vol. V, pp. 204-216.
BLACK, G. A., and P. WEER
     1936 A Proposed Terminology for Shape Classification of Artifacts. American
          Antiquity, Vol. I, pp. 280-294.
BLOM, FRANS
     1935 Maya Calculation and Construction. The Military Engineer, January-
          February, pp. 1-6.
BLUMENTHAL, ALBERT
     1936 The Nature of Culture. American Sociological Review, Vol. I, pp. 875-893.
     1937a    The Best Definilion of Culture. Marietta College Press, Marietta, Ohio.
     1937b Culture Consists of Ideas. Ibid.
     1938a The Importance of the Most Useful Definition of the Term “Culture.”
          Ibid.
     1938b The Relations between Culture, Human Social Interaction, Personality
          and History. Ibid.
226


      1940  A New Definition of Culture. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLII,
         pp. 571-586.
BOAS, FRANZ
     1896 The Limitations of the Comparative Method of Anthropology. In: Race,
         Language, and Culture, pp. 270-280. New York, 1940.
     1904 The History of Anthropology. Science, Vol. XX, pp. 513-524.
     1932 The Aims of Anthropological Research. /bid., Vol. LX XVI, pp. 605-613.
     1934 Introduction. In: Patterns of Culture, by Ruth Benedict, pp. xi-xiii. New
         York.
     1936 History and Science in Anthropology: a Reply. American Anthropologist,
          Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 137-141.
     1938 Introduction. In: General Anthropology, Franz Boas, ed. New York.
BORLASE, WILLIAM
     1764 Antiquities, historical and monumental, of the County of Cornwall, 2nd
          ed. London.
BOUCHER DE PERTHES, J.
     1847-1857      Antiquités Celtiques et Antédiluviennes, 2 vols. Paris.
     1863-1866      Sous Dix Rois, Souvenirs de 1791 a 1860, 7 vols. Paris.
     1908 Inauguration de la Statue de Boucher de Perthes. Bulletins No. 3 and No. 4,
          Societé d’Emulation d’Abbeville.
BOULE, MARCELLIN
     1921    Les Hommes Fossiles. Paris.
BOWDERY, 6G. J.
     1941    Conventions and Norms. Philosophy of Science, Vol. VIII, pp. 493-505.
BOYD, J. P.
     1934 State and Local Historical Societies in the United States. American
          Historical Review, Vol. XL, pp. 10-37.
BOYS, W.
     1792 Collection for an History of Sandwich in Kent. Canterbury.
BRADFORD, A. W.
     1843 American Antiquities, and Researches into the Origin and History of the
          Red Race. New York.
BRAINERD, G. W.
      1940 Study of Yucatan Pottery. Yearbook, No. 39, pp. 270-274. Carnegie
           Institution of Washington.
BRAND, D. D.
     1937 The   Status of Anthropology in the Western United States. The New
         Mexico Anthropologist, Vol. II, pp. 4-16.
BREW, J. 0.
     1946 Archaeology of Alkali Ridge, Southeastern Utah. Papers, Vol. XXI. Pea-
         body Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology.
BRINTON, CRANE
     1938 The Anatomy of Revolution. New York.
BRINTON, D. G.
      18664 The Mound-builders of the Mississippi Valley. The Historical Magazine,
           Vol. X, pp. 33-37.
TAYLOR                        A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                227

     1866b The Shawnees and Their Migrations. /bid., Vol. X, pp. 1-4.
     1892 The Nomenclature and Teaching of Anthropology. American Anthropolo-
           gist, 0.s., Vol. V, pp. 263-266.
     1895 The Aims of Anthropology. Science, n.s., Vol. II, pp. 241-252.
     1896a The Aims of Anthropology. Proceedings, Vol. XLIV, pp. 1-17. American
           Association for the Advancement of Science.
     1896b An Ethnologist’s View of History. Philadelphia.
BRITTON, JOHN
     1836     Cathedral Antiquities, historical and descriptive. London.
BROWN, L. G.
     1944 Anthropology and Sociology. Journal of Social Forces, Vol. XXIII, pp.
           153-155.
BRYAN, B.
        1931     Excavation of the Galaz Ruin. Masterkey, Vol. IV, pp. 179-189; Vols. VI
         and VII, pp. 221-226.
BUCKLE, H. T.
     1876 History of Civilization in England, 2 vols., ed., 1920. New York.
BURCKHARDT, JACOB
     1860 The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. Trans. by S. G. C. Middle-
         more, 2 vols., 1878. London.
BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY
     1907 Handbook of American Indians. Bulletin 30, 2 vols. Washington.
BURTON, H.
     1938 A Survey of Japanese Historiography. American Historical Review, Vol.
         XLII, pp. 489-499.
BURY, J. B.
     1903 The Science of History. In: Selected Essays, H. Temperley,          ed., 1930.
          Cambridge.
     1906 The Place of Modern History in the Perspective of Knowledge. /bid.
     1909 Darwinism and History. /bid.
BUTLER, MARY
     1931 Dress and Decoration of the Maya Old Empire. The Museum Journal,
         Vol. XXII, pp. 155-183. University of Pennsylvania.
BYERS, D. S.
     1941 The Taxonomic Approach Redefined. Bulletin, Vol. II, pp. 21-25. Massa-
           chusetts Archaeological Society.
CAIRD, JOHN
      1899 University Addresses. Glasgow.
CAMBRIDGE ANCIENT HISTORY
      1923-1939    Preface to Volume I. Cambridge.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY
     1937 The Students Handbook to the University and Colleges of Cambridge.
           Cambridge.
CARTAILHAC, EMILE
     1877 L’Age de Pierre dans les Souvenirs et Superstitions Populaires. Paris.
228


CASE, C. M.
     1927. Culture as a Distinctive Human Trait. American Journal of Sociology, Vol.
        XXXII,    pp. 906-920.
CHAMBERLAIN, A. F.
    1907 Thomas Jefferson’s Ethnological Opinions and Activities. American Anthro-
        pologist, n.s., Vol. LX, pp. 499-509.
CHAMBERLAIN, L. J., and E. A. HOEBEL
    1942 Anthropology Offerings in American Undergraduate Colleges. /bid., Vol.
        XLIV, pp. 527-530.
CHAMBERLIN, T. C.
     1897 Multiple Working Hypotheses. Journal of Geology, Vol. V, pp. 837-848.
CHENEY, E. P.
     1924 Law in History. American Historical Review, Vol. XXIX, pp. 231-248.
CHILDE, V. G.
     1937 A Prehistorian’s Interpretation of Diffusion. In: Jndependence, Conver-
         gence, and Borrowing in Institutions, Thought, and Art, pp. 3-21. Harvard
         University Press, Cambridge.
     1939 The Dawn of European Civilization, 2nd ed. New York.
CHOUKAS, M.
     1936 The Concept of Cultural Lag Re-examined. American Sociological Review,
         Vol. I, pp. 752-760.
CLARK, GRAHAME
     1939 Archaeology and Society. London.
     1940 Prehistoric Egland. London.
CLARK, KENNETH
     1928 The Gothic Revival. London.
COCHET, ABBE
     1855 La Normandie Souterraine. Paris.
COHEN, M. R.
     1931    Reason and Nature. New York.
COHEN, M. R., and ERNEST NAGEL
     1934 An Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method. New York.
COLE, F. C., and T. DEUEL
     1937 Rediscovering Illinois. University of Chicago Press.
COLLIER, D., and G. I. QUIMBY, JR.
     1945 Review of The Fort Ancient Aspect, by J. B. Griffin. American Anthro-
          pologist, n.s., Vol. XLVII, pp. 142-146.
COLLINGWOOD, R. G., A. E. TAYLOR, and F. C. S. SCHILLER
     1922    Are History and Science Different Kinds of Knowledge? Mind, Vol. XXXI,
         pp. 442-466.
COLTON, H. S.
     1939 Prehistoric Culture Units and Their Relationships in Northern Arizona.
         Bulletin 17, Museum of Northern Arizona.
     1942 Archaeology and the Reconstruction of History. American Antiquity, Vol.
         VIII, pp. 33-40,
TAYLOR                        A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                229


     1943a The Principle of Analogous Pottery Types. American Anthropologist, n.s.,
          Vol. XLV, pp. 316-320.
     1943b    Reconstruction of Anasazi History. Proceedings, Vol. LXXXVI, pp. 264-
          269. American Philosophical Society.
COLTON, H. S., and L. L. HARGRAVE
     1937 Handbook of Northern Arizona Pottery Wares. Bulletin 11, Museum of
          Northern Arizona’
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
     1940 Bulletin of Information, 40th Series, Nos. 26 and 34.
COSGROVE, H. S., and C. B. COSGROVE
     1932 The Swarts Ruin, a Typical Mimbres Site in Southwestern New Mexico.
          Papers, Vol. XV. Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology.
COULBORN, RUSHTON
     1941    An Historian’s Consolation in Philosophy. Southern Review, Vol. VII, pp.
          40ff.
     1944 The Meaning of History. Ethics, Vol. LV, pp. 46-63.
COULBORN, R., and W. E. B. DUBOIS
     1942    Mr. Sorokin’s Systems. Journal of Modern History, Vol. XIV, pp. 500-521.
CRAMER, 6G. F.
     1938 Determination of a Mayan Unit of Linear Measurement. American Mathe-
            matical Monthly, Vol. XLV, pp. 344-347.
CRAWFORD, 0. G. S.
     1932     The Dialectical Process in the History of Science. The Sociological Review,
          April-June, pp. 165-173.
CREIGHTON, J. E.
     1913 An Introductory Logic. New York.
CRESSMAN, L. S.
     1942    Archaeological Researches in the Northern Great Basin. Publication No.
          538, Carnegie Institution of Washington.
CRESSON, F. M.
     1938    Maya and Mexican Sweat Houses. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XL,
            pp. 88-104.
CROCE, B.
     1921    Theory and History of Historiography. Trans. by Douglas Ainslie. London.
     1933    Letter to C. A. Beard and the American Historical Association. American
          Historical Review, Vol. XX XIX, pp. 229-231.
CROIZAT, LEON
     1941    A Further Comment on Stability in Nomenclature. Science, n.s., Vol.
          XCIII, pp. 109-110.
CURWEN, E. C.
     1937. The Archaeology of Sussex. London.
CUST, LIONEL, and SIDNEY COLVIN
     1898 History of the Society of Dilettanti. New York.
CUTTER, G. F.
     1939 Northeastern Classification. American Antiquity, Vol. IV, p. 352.
230


DAVENPORT, C. B., and J.W. BLANKINSHIP
      1898     A Brecie Criterion of Species. Science, n.s., Vol. VII, pp. 685- 695.
DAVIS, A., B. B. GARDNER, and M. R. GARDNER
      1041 Deep South: A social anthropological study of caste and class. Uni-
          versity of Chicago Press.
DELAFIELD, JOHN, JR.
      1839 An Inquiry into the Origins of the Antiquities of America. New York.
DELLENBAUGH, F. S.
      1918      A Memorial to J. W. Powell. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XX, pp.
             432ff.
DENNESS, W. R.
      1942   Conceptions of Civilization: Descriptive and Normative. In: Civilization,
          Publications in Philosophy, Vol. XXIII, pp. 161-190. University of California.
DEUEL, THORNE
     1935 Basic Cultures of the Mississippi Valley. American Anthropologist, n.s.,
          Vol. XXXVII, pp. 429-446.
DIESERUD, J.
     1908 Science of Anthropology, its scope and content. Chicago.
DOLLARD, JOHN
     1939 Culture, Society, Impulse, and Socialization. American Journal of Soci-
          ology, Vol. XLV, pp. 50-63.
DOUGLAS, JAMES
      1793 Nenia Britannica: or, a Sepulchral History of Greai Britain from the
          Earliest Period to its General Conversion to Christianity. London.
DOW, E. W.
     1899 Features of the New History; apropos of Lamprecht’s Deutsche Geschichte.
          Report, Vol. III, pp. 431-448. American Historical Association.
DRAKE, S. G.
     1832 Biography and History of the Indians of North America. Boston.
DRIBERG, J. H.
     1932 At Home with the Savage. New York.
DRIVER, H. E., and A. L. KROEBER
     1932 Quantitative Expression of Cultural Relationships. Publications in American
          Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. XXXI, pp. 211-256. University of Cali-
          fornia.
DROYSON, J. G.
     1882 Grundriss der Historik. Leipzig.
DUGDALE, WILLIAM
     1655-1673     Monasticon Anglicanum. London.
     1656 Antiquities of Warwickshire. London.
ECCARD(US)
     1750 De Origine Germanorum eorumque vetustissimis coloniis migrationibus ac
          rebus gestis libri duo. Goetingae.
EGGLESTON, EDWARD
     1900 The New History. Report, Vol. I, pp. 35-48. American Historical Association.
TAYLOR                          A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                            231

ELLWOOD, C. A.
     1944 Culture and Human Society. Journal of Social Forces, Vol. XXIII, pp. 6-15.
EMBREE, J. F.
     1944    Community Analysis—an example of anthropology in government. Ameri-
          can Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLVI, pp. 277-291.
EMORY, W. H.
     1848 Notes on a Military Reconnaissance, from Fort Leavenworth, in Missouri,
          to San Diego, in California including parts of the Arkansas, Del Norte, and
            Gila Rivers. Made in 1846-1847. Senate Executive Documents, 31st Congress,
            1st Session. Washington.
ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA
    ed. 1911 New York.
ENCYCLOPEDIA OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
     1930-1936       War and Reorientation. Vol. I, pp. 189-228.
EVANS, JOHN
     1897a The Ancient Stone Implements, Weapons, and Ornaments of Great
          Britain. 2nd ed. London.
     1897b Presidential Address of the British Association for the Advancement of
          Science. Science, n.s., Vol. VI, pp. 269-283.
FAIRBANKS, C. H.
     1938    Classification Problems of Southeastern Archaeology in Relation to Work
          Done in the Tennessee Valley. (Mimeographed. )
     1941    Classification in the Southeast. News Letter, Vol. II, pp. 10-13. South-
          eastern Archaeological Conference.
     1942 The Taxonomic Position of Stalling’s Island. American Antiquity, Vol. VU,
            Ppa 223-231.
FAIRCHILD, H. N.
     1928  The Noble Savage; a study in romantic naturalism.       Columbia   University
            Press.
FELLOWS, G. E.
     1896 The Relation of Anthropology to the Study of History. American Journal
         of Sociology, Vol. I, pp. 41-49.
FEWKES, J. W.
     1914 Archaeology of the Lower Mimbres Valley, New Mexico. Miscellaneous
         Collections, Vol. LXIII, pp. 1-53. Smithsonian Institution, Washington.
     1916 Prehistoric Remains in New Mexico. Jbid., Vol. LXV, pp. 62-72.
     1916 Animal Figures on Prehistoric Pottery from Mimbres Valley, New Mexico.
         American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XVIII, pp. 535-545.
     1923 Designs on Prehistoric Pottery from the Mimbres Valley, New Mexico.
            Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. LX XIV, pp. 1-47. Smithsonian Institution.
     1924      Additional Designs on Prehistoric Mimbres Pottery. Jbid., Vol. LXXVI,
            pp. 1-46.
FINKELSTEIN, J. J.
     1937 A Suggested Projectile-Point Classification. American     Antiquity, Vol. II,
         pp. 197-203.
232


FLINT, ROBERT
     1803 Historical Philosophy in France and French Belgium and Switzerland.
          London.
FORD, C. S.
     1939 Society, Culture, and the Human Organism. Journal of General Psychology,
          Vol. XX, pp. 135-179.
     1942 Culture and Human Behavior. Scientific Monthly, Vol. LV, pp. 546-557.
FORDE, C. D.
     1939 Human Geography, History and Sociology. The Scottish Geographical
          Magazine, Vol. LV, pp. 217-235.
FOWKE, GERARD
     1902 Archaeological History of Ohio. Columbus.
FOWLER, H. N., and J. R. WHEELER
     1909 A Handbook of Greek Archaeology. New York.
FRANK, L. K.
     1940 Science and Culture. Scientific Monthly, Vol. L, pp. 491-497.
     1943 Man’s Multitudinous Environment. /bid., Vol. LVI, pp. 344-357.
FRAZER, J. G.
     1898 Pausanias’s Description of Greece, 6 Vols. London.
FREEMAN, E. A.
     1886 The Methods of Historical Study. London.
FUNKHOUSER,           W. D., and W. S. WEBB
      1929  The So-called “Ash Caves” in Lee County, Kentucky. Reports in Archae-
          ology and Anthropology, Vol. I. No. 2. University of Kentucky.
     1937 The Chilton Site in Henry County, Kentucky. /bid., Vol. III, No. 5.
GANN, T., and J. E. THOMPSON
     1931    The History of the Maya. New York.
GIDDINGS, F. H.
     1922 Studies in the Theory of Human Society. New York.
GIFFORD, E. W., and Ww. E. SCHENCK
     1926 Archaeology of the Southern San Joaquin Valley, California. Publications
          in American Archaeology and Ethnology. Vol. XXIII, pp. 1-122. University
          of California.
GILLIN, JOHN
     1939 Some Unfinished Business in Cultural Anthropology. Ohio Archaeological
          and Historical Quarterly, Vol. XLVIII, pp. 44-52.
     1944 Cultural Adjustment. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLVI, pp. 429-
             447.
GLADWIN, H. S., E. W. HAURY, E. B. SAYLES, and N. GLADWIN
     1937  Excavations at Snaketown. Medallion Papers,      Vol.   XXV.   Globe,   Ariz.
GLOTZ, GUSTAVE
      1925      The    Aegean   Civilization.   London.
GOGUET, A. Y.
     1758 Les Origines des Lois, des Arts et des Sciences, et de leurs Progres chez
         les Anciens Peuples. 3 vols. Paris.
TAYLOR                              A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                         233

GOLDENWEISER, A. A.
    1918 History, Psychology and Culture. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and
          the Scientific Method, Vol. XV, pp. 561-571; 589-607.
    1933a     Cultural Anthropology. In: History, Psychology, and Culture, pp. 121-164.
          New York.
     1933b    History, Psychology, and Culture. New York.
GOLDSMITH, W. M.                c
     1945      Trepanation and the “Catlin Mark.” American Antiquity, Vol. X, pp. 348-
            $52:
GOOCH, G. P.
      1913 History and Historians in the Nineteenth Century. New York.
GORODZOY, V. A.
      1933     The Typological Method in Archaeology. American Anthropologist, n.s.,
           Vol. XXXV, pp. 95-102.
GRIFFIN, J. B.
      1935 An Analysis of the Fort Ancient Culture. Notes from the Ceramic Reposi-
            tory of the Eastern United States, Vol. I. University of Michigan.
      1937a The Archaeological Remains of the Chiwere Sioux. American Antiquity,
           Vol. II, pp. 180-181.
      1937b The Chronological Position and Ethnological Relationships of the Fort
           Ancient Aspect. American Antiquity, Vol. II, pp. 273-276.
      1937c A Classificatory System as a Working Base for the Study of North
           American Archaeology. Indianapolis Archaeological Conference, pp. 48-50.
           National Research Council, Division of Anthropology and Psychology, Com-
           mittee on State Archaeological Surveys.
     1938 The Ceramic Remains from Norris Basin, Tennessee. In: “An Archaeological
           Survey of the Norris Basin in Eastern Tennessee,” by W. S. Webb. Bulletin
           118, pp. 253-358. Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington.
      1939 Report of the Ceramics of Wheeler Basin. In: “An Archaeological Survey
           of Wheeler Basin on the Tennessee River in Northern Alabama,” by W. S.
           Webb. Bulletin 122, pp. 127-165. Bureau of American Ethnology.
     1941     Additional Hopewell Material from Illinois. Prehistoric Research Series,
           Vol. II, pp. 165-223. Indianapolis.
     1942     Adena Pottery. American Antiquity, Vol. VII, pp. 344-358.
     1943     The Fort Ancient Aspect, its cultural and chronological position in
           Mississippi Valley Archaeology. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
     1944a The DeLuna Expedition and the “Buzzard Cult” in the Southeast. Journal,
           Vol. XXXIV, pp. 299-303. Washington Academy of Sciences.
     1944b      The Iroquois in American Prehistory. Papers, Vol. XXIX, pp. 357-374.
           Michigan Academy of Science, Arts and Letters.
     1945a An Interpretation of Siouan Archaeology in the Piedmont of North
           Carolina and Virginia. American Antiquity, Vol. X, pp. 321-330.
     1945b      Review of The Pre-Iroquoian Occupation of New York State, by W. A.
            Ritchie. American       Antiquity, Vol. X, pp. 401-407.
234


GRIFFIN, J. B., and C. W. ANGELL
                                                                              Making.
     1935 An Experimental Study of the Technique of Indian Pottery
         Papers,  Vol. XX, pp.  1-6. Michigan Academy   of  Science, Arts and  Letters.
GRIFFIN, J. B., and G. NEUMANN
     1942 Burial Terminology and Description. Notebook, Vol. II, pp. 70-79. Society
         for American Archaeology.
GRIFFIN, J. B., and others
     1941 Contributions to the Archaeology of the Illinois River Valley. Transactions,
          n.s., Vol. XXXII. American Philosophical Society.
GROSE, FRANCIS
     1773-1787     The Antiquities of England and Wales. London.
GUERNSEY, S. J.
     1931     Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Papers, Vol. XII, No. 1. Peabody
          Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology.
GUERNSEY, S. J., and A. V. KIDDER
      1921 Basket-Maker Caves of Northeastern Arizona. /bid., Vol. VIII, No. 2.
GULHE, CE
      1936 Review of “Basic Cultures of the Mississippi Valley,” by Thorne Deuel.
          American Antiquity, Vol. I, pp. 249-250.
      1942 Foreword to The Fort Ancient Aspect, by J. B. Griffin. University of
           Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
HADDON, A. C.
      1934 History of Anthropology. London.
HALL, H. R.
      1915 Aegean Archaeology. London.
HALLOWELL, A. I.
      1935 Handbook of Psychological Leads. (Mimeographed.)
HAMY, E, T.
      1906 Materiaux pour servir 4 l’Histoire de l’Archeologie Prehistorique. Revue
           Archeologique, Vol. VII, pp. 239-259.
HARLAN, H. H.
      1944 The Culture of Infants. Journal of Social Forces, Vol. XXII, pp. 311-314.
HARRISON, W. H.
      1838 A Discourse on the Aborigines of the Valley of the Ohio. Cincinnati.
HART, H., and A. PANTZER
     1925 Have Subhuman        Animals   Culture?   American   Journal   of Sociology, Vol.
             XXX, pp. 703ff.
 HARVARD UNIVERSITY
      1941 Catalogue. Cambridge.
 HAURY, E. W.
      1934    The Canyon Creek Ruin and The Cliff Dwellings of the Sierra Ancha.
           Medallion Papers, Vol. XIV. Globe, Ariz.
      1936a A Glimpse of the Prehistoric Southwest. Indians at Work, Vol.
                                                                              IV
           pp. 15-22.
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               235

     1936b The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico. Medallion Papers,
          Vol. XX. Globe, Ariz.
     1936c    Some Southwestern Pottery Types, Series IV. Jbid., Vol. XIX.
     1940 Excavations in the Forestdale Valley, East-central Arizona. Bulletin, Vol.
          XI, No. 4. University of Arizona.
HAVEN, S. F.
     1855 Archaeology of the United States. Contributions to Knowledge, Vol. VIII.
          Smithsonian Institution, Washington.
HAWKES, C. F. C.
     1940 The Prehistoric Foundations of Europe to the Mycenean Age. London.
HAYDEN, F. V.
     1867-1883    United States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories.
          Annual Reports, Vols. I-XII. United States Geological Survey.
HAYWOOD, JOHN
     1823 The Natural and Aboriginal History of Tennessee, up to the first settle-
          ment therein by the white people. Nashville.
HEARNE, THOMAS (ed.)
     1720 A Collection of Curious Discourses, written by eminent antiquaries upon
          several heads in English antiquities. London.
HEARNSHAW, F. J. C.
     1931    The Science of History. In: An Outline of Modern Knowledge, W. Rose,
          ed., pp. 773-812. London.
HEIERLI, JAKOB
     1901    Urgeschichte der Schweiz. Bern.
HENDERSON, L. J.
     1935 Pareto’s General Sociology. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
HENSHAW, H. W.
     1905    Popular Fallacies Respecting the Indians. American Anthropologist, n.s.,
          Vol. VII, pp. 104-113.
HILL, W. W.
     1939 Stability in Culture and Pattern. 7bid., Vol. XLI, pp. 258-260.
HOARE, R. C.
     1812-1821    The Ancient History of Wiltshire. London.
HOBBS, W. H.
     1934 J. W. Powell. Scientific Monthly, Vol. XXXIX, pp. 519-529.
HOLMES, W. H.
     1907 Archeology. In: “Handbook of American Indians.”’ Bulletin 30, Bureau of
          American Ethnology, Washington.
     1919 Handbook of Aboriginal American Antiquities. Bulletin 60, Bureau of
         American   Ethnology.
HONIGSHEIM, PAUL
    1942 The Philosophical Background of European Anthropology. American
        Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLIV, pp. 376-387.
HOUGH, WALTER
    1898 Otis T. Mason. American Anthropologist, 0.s., Vol. X, pp. 661-667.
236


HSU, F. L-K.                                                                 rece
    n.d. The       Meaning of “Typical” in Sociology. National Yunan University,
          Kunming.
HUGHES, J. T.
     1848 Doniphan’s Expedition: containing an account of the conquest of New
          Mexico. Cincinnati.
HUIZINGA, JOHAN
     1936 A Definition of the Concept of History. In: Philosophy and History;
          Essays Presented to Ernst Cassirer. Ed. by Raymond Klibansky and H. J.
          Paton. Trans. by D. R. Cousin. The Claredon Press, Oxford.
HULME, E. M.
     1942 History and Its Neighbors. Oxford University Press.
HUNT, WILLIAM
     1884 Early Britain—Norman Britain. London.
HUXLEY, T. H.
     1871     Mr. Darwin’s Critics. The Contemporary Review, Vol. XVIII, pp. 443-476.
JAMESON, J. F.
     1891     The History of Historical Writing in America. Boston.
JEFFERSON, THOMAS
     1788 Notes on the State of Virginia. Philadelphia.
JEWITT, L.
     1877 Half-hours among some English Antiquities. London.
JOHNSON, FREDERICK
     1937 Problems Surrounding the Classification of Certain Culture Complexes in
          New England. American Antiquity, Vol. III, pp. 161-165.
     1944 Review of The Pre-Iroquoian Occupations of New York State, by W. A.
           Ritchie. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLVI, pp. 530-535.
JUDD, N. M.
     1940 Progress in the Southwest. In: “Essays in Historical Anthropology.”
           Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. C, pp. 417-444. Smithsonian Institution,
           Washington.
KENDRICK, T. D.
     1927 The Druids, a study in Keltic prehistory. London.
KIDDER, A. V.
     1915     Pottery of the Pajarito Plateau and of Some Adjacent Regions in New
           Mexico. Memoirs, Vol. II, pp. 407-462. American Anthropological Associa-
           tion.
     1924 An Introduction to the Study of Southwestern Archaeology. Papers, No. 1,
           Southwestern Expedition. New Haven.
     1926     The Mimbres Excavations, season of 1926. (Typewritten.)
     1930a      Year Book, No. 29. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
      1930b An Archeological Research and Its Ramifications. Scientific Monthly,
           Vol. XXXI, pp. 145-150.
      1930c     Conference at Chichen Itza. Science, Vol. LXXI, pp. 391-392.
     1931a The Future of Man in the Light of the Past: the viewpoint of an
           archeologist. Scientific Monthly, Vol. XXII, pp. 289-293.
TAYLOR                           A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                237


     1931b    Year Book, No. 30. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1932a The Artifacts of Pecos. Southwestern Expedition, Papers, No. 6. New
          Haven.
     1932b     Year Book, No. 31. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1933     Jbid., No.   32.
     1934     Jbid., No.   33.
     1935a    Notes on the Ruins of San Agustin Acasaguastlan, Guatemala. Contribu-
          tions to American Archaeology, Vol. III, pp. 105-120. Carnegie Institution
          of Washington.
     1935b    Year Book, No. 34. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1936a The Archaeology of Peripheral Regions. Southwestern           Lore,   Vol.   II,
          pp. 46-48.
     1936b   Introduction, and Discussion. In: “The Pottery of Pecos,’ Vol. II, by
          A. V. Kidder and A.°O. Shepard. Papers, No. 7, Southwestern Expedition.
          New Haven.
     1936c     Speculations on New World Prehistory. In: Essays in Anthropology, pre-
          sented to A. L. Kroeber, pp. 143-151. University of California Press.
     1937a     The Development of Maya Research. Proceedings, Pan-American Insti-
          tute of Geography and History, 2nd General Assembly. Washington.
     1937b     Foreword. In: “Excavations at Snaketown, II,” by H. S. Gladwin. Medal-
          lion Papers, No. 26. Globe, Ariz.
     1937c A Program for Maya Research. Hispanic American Historical Review,
          Vol. XVII, pp. 160-169.
     1939 Carnegie Institution of Washington, Year Book, No. 38.
     1940a Looking Backward. Proceedings, Vol. LXXXIII, pp. 527-537. American
          Philosophical Society.
     1940b     Year Book, No. 39. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1942    Foreword. In: “Rio Grande Glaze Paint Ware,” by A. O. Shepard. Con-
           tributions to American Anthropology and History, Vol. VII, pp. i-iv. Carnegie
          Institution of Washington.
     1945a     Excavations at Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala. American Antiquity, Vol. XI,
          pp. 65-75.
     1945b     George Clapp Vaillant. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLVII,
            pp. 589-602.
KIDDER, A. V., and S. J. GUERNSEY
     1919 Archaeological Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Bulletin 65, Bureau
          of American Ethnology. Washington.
     1022   Notes on the Artifacts and on Foods. In: “A Basket-Maker Cave in Kane
          County, Utah,” by J. L. Nusbaum. Indian Notes and Monographs. Museum
          of the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
KIDDER, A. V., and A. 0. SHEPARD
     1944 Stucco Decorations of Early Guatemala Pottery. Notes on Middle Ameri-
         can Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. II, pp. 23-30. Carnegie Institution of
            Washington.
238


KIDDER, A. V., and J. E. THOMPSON
     1938 The Correlation of Maya and Christian Chronologies. Cooperation in
         Research, pp. 493-510. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
KLUCKHOHN, CLYDE
     1939 On Certain Recent Applications of Association Coefficients to Ethnological
         Data. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLI, pp. 345-377.
     1940 The Conceptual Structure in Middle American Studies. In: The Maya and
         Their Neighbors. New York.
      1941  Patterning as Exemplified in Navaho Culture. In: Language, Culture, and
         Personality, L. Spier, A. I. Hallowell, and S. S. Newman, eds., pp. 109-130.
         Menasha.
     1943 Covert Culture and Administration Problems. American Anthropologist,
         n.s., Vol. XLV, pp. 213-227.
KLUCKHOHN, C., and W. H. KELLY
     1944 The Concept of Culture (Mimeographed). Abridged version in: The
         Science of Man in the World Crisis, R. Linton, ed. Columbia University
         Press, New York.
KLUCKHOHN, C., and P. REITER (eds.)
     1939 Preliminary Report of the 1937 Excavations, Bc50-51, Chaco Canyon,
         New Mexico. Bulletin 345, Anthropological Series, Vol. III, No. 2. Univer-
         sity of New Mexico.
KLUVER, H.
     1925 The Problem of Type. Journal of Philosophy, Vol. XXII, pp. 225-234.
KOHN, A., and C. MEHLIS
     1879 Materialien zur Vorgeschichte des Menschen im Ostlichen Europa. Jena.
KRAUS, MICHAEL
     1937 A History of American History. New York.
KRIEGER, ALEX
     1940 “The Basic Needs of American Archaeology, a Commentary.” American
         Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLII, pp. 543-546.
     1944 The Typological Concept. American Antiquity, Vol. IX, pp. 271-288.
KROEBER, A. L.
     1915 Frederick Ward Putnam. American Anthropologist, n.s eV. Owe VAL Ti
             pp. 712-718.
      1923 Anthropology. New York.
      1935a History and Science in Anthropology. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol.
           XXXV, pp. 539-569.
      1935    (ed.) Walapai Ethnography. Memoirs, No. 42. American Anthropological
           Association.
      1936    So-Called Social Science. Journal of Social Philosophy, Vol. I, pp. 317-340.
      1937 Archaeology. In: Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. II, pp. 163-167.
      1940a Statistical Classification. American Antiquity, Vol. VI, pp. 29-44.
      1940b Stimulus Diffusion. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLII, pp. 1-20.
      1943 Review of A Study of History, by A. J. Toynbee. Ibid., Vol. XLV, pp. 294-
             299.
TAYLOR                          A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               239

    1944    Configurations of Culture Growth. University of California Press, Berkeley.
    1946    History and Evolution. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. II,
         pp. 1-15.
KUBLER, GEORGE
     1943 The Cycle of Life and Death in Metropolitan Aztec Sculpture. Gazette des
         Beaux-Arts, Ser. vi, xxiii, pp. 257-268.
LABARRE, WESTON
     1938 The Peyote Cult. Publications in Anthropology, No. 19. Yale University.
LAFITAU, J. F.
     1724 Moeurs des Sauvages Ameriquains, comparées aux moeurs des primiers
            temps. 2 vols. Paris.
LANGLOIS,     C. V., and C. SEIGNOBOS
     1898      Introduction to the Study of History. Trans. by G. G. Berry, 4th imp.
            1932. London.
LAPHAM, J. C.
    1853 The        Antiquities of Wisconsin. Contributions   to Knowledge,   Vol.   VII.
            Smithsonian Institution, Washington.
LEEDS, E. T.
     1936 Early Anglo-Saxon Art and Archaeology. Oxford.
LEIGHTON, A. H.
     1945 The Governing of Men. Princeton University Press.
LESSER, A.
     1935 Functionalism in Social Anthropology. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol.
          XXXVII, pp. 386-393.
      1939 Research Procedure and Laws of Culture. Philosophy of Science, Vol. VI,
            pp. 345-355.
LEWIS, T. M. N.
     1943 Late Horizons in the Southeast. In: “Recent Advances in American
         Archaeology.” Proceedings, Vol. LXXXVI, pp. 304-312. American Philo-
         sophical Society.
LEWIS, T. M. N., and M. KNEBERG
     1946 Hiwassee Island. University of Tennessee       Press, Knoxville.
LINTON, RALPH
     1936a    Errors in Anthropology. In: The Story of Human Error, by J. Jastrow,
          pp. 292-321. New York.
     1936b The Study of Man. New York.
     1938 Culture, Society and the Individual. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psy-
          chology, Vol. XX XIII, pp. 425-436.
     1945a The Cultural Background of Personality. New York.
     1945b The Science of Man in the World Crisis. R. Linton, ed. Columbia Uni-
          versity Press, New York.
     1945c The Scope and Aims of Anthropology. In: The Science of Man in the
          World Crisis. R. Linton, ed. New York.
     1945d Foreword to The Psychological Frontiers of Society, by Abram Kardiner,
            pp. v-xiii. Columbia University Press.
240


LOUD,     L. L., and M. R. HARRINGTON
        1029 Lovelock Cave. Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol.
             XXV, No. 1. University of California.
LOWELL, J. R.
     1870 Among My Books. Elmwood Edition, 1904. Cambridge.
LOWIE, R. H.
     1917 Culture and Ethnology. New York.
     1936a Cultural Anthropology: a science. American Journal of Sociology, Vol.
             XLII, pp. 301-320.
        1936b    Professional Appreciation. In: Essays in Anthropology presented to A. L.
             Kroeber, pp. xix-xxiii. University of California Press, Berkeley.
        1937   The History of Ethnological Theory. New York.
LUNDBERG, G. A.
     1940 Some Problems of Group Classification and Measurement. American
         Sociological Review, Vol. V, pp. 351-360.
LYELL, CHARLES
     1830-1833 Principles of Geology. 3 vols. London.
     1863 The Geological Evidence of the Antiquity of Man, with remarks on
          theories of the origin of species by variation. Philadelphia.
LYND, R. S.
     1939 Knowledge for What? Princeton University Press.
LYND, R. S., and H. M. LYND
      1929 Middletown. New York.
      1937 Middletown in Transition. New York.
MacCURDY, G. G.
      1899 Extent of Instruction in Anthropology in Europe and the United States.
           Science, n.s., Vol. X, pp. 910-917.
      1902 Teaching of Anthropology in the United States. /bid., Vol. XV, pp. 211-216.
      1924 Human Origins. New York.
MACcIVER, R. M.
      1931    Is Sociology a Natural Science? Publications, Vol. XXV, pp. 25-35. Ameri-
           can Sociological Society.
MAJEWSKI, E. DE
      1908 La Science de la Civilisation. Paris.
MALINOWSKI, B.
      1931    Culture. In: Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. IV, pp. 620-645.
      1934 Introduction. In: Law and Order in Polynesia, by H. I. Hogbin. New York.
        1936     Culture as a Determinant   of Behavior. Scientific Monthly, Vol. XLIII,
             pp. 440-449.
        1939 Review of six essays on culture by Albert Blumenthal (see above).
             American Sociological Review, Vol. IV, pp. 588-592.
        1941    Man’s Culture and Man’s Behavior. Sigma Xi Quarterly, Vol. XXIX, Nos. 3
             and 4, pp. 182-196.
        1944     A Scientific Theory of Culture   and Other Essays. University of North
               Carolina Press, Chapel Hill,
TAYLOR                        A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 241


MANDELBAUM, MAURICE
     1938 The Problem of Historical Knowledge. New York.
MARETT, R. R.
    n.d. The Beginnings of Morals and Culture: an introduction to social anthro-
          pology. In: An Outline of Modern Knowledge, W. Rose, ed. London.
     1934 The Growth and Tendency of Anthropological and Ethnological Studies.
          Compte-rendu, Vol. I, pp. 39-53. Congres International des Sciences Anthro-
          pologiques et Ethnologiques. London.
MARTIN, A. VON
     1932 Sociology of the Renaissance. Trans. by W. L. Leutkens, ed., 1944. London.
MARTIN, P. S.
     1938 Archaeological Work in the Ackmen-Lowry Area, Southwestern Colorado,
          1937. Anthropological Series, XXIII, No. 2. Field Museum of Natural
          History, Chicago.
     1939    Modified Basket Maker Sites, Ackmen-Lowry Area, Southwestern Colo-
          rado, 1938. [bid., No. 3.
MASON, 0. T.
     1883      The Scope and Value of Anthropological Studies. Proceedings, Vol. XXXII,
            pp. 367-383. American Association for the Advancement of Science.
MCCULLOH, J. H., JR.
     1829 Researches, Philosophical and Antiquarian,         concerning   the   Aboriginal
         History of America. Baltimore.
MCGREGOR, J. C.
     1941 Southwestern Archaeology. New York.
MCILWAIN, C. H.
     1937    The Historian’s Part in a Changing World. American Historical Review,
          Vol. XLII, pp. 207-224.
MCKERN, W. C.
     1933 Local Types and the Regional Distribution of Pottery Bearing Cultures.
          Transactions, Vol. XXV, pp. 84-86. Illinois State Academy of Science.
     1937    Certain Culture Classification Problems in Middle Western Archaeology.
          The Indianapolis Archaeological Conference, pp. 70-82. National Research
          Council, Division of Anthropology and Psychology, Committee on State
          Archaeological Surveys. Washington.
     1938 Review of Rediscovering Illinois, by Cole and Deuel. American Antiquity,
          Vol. III, pp. 368-374.
     1939 The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an Aid to Archaeological Culture
          Study. American Antiquity, Vol. IV, pp. 301-313.
     1940 Application of the Midwestern Taxonomic Method. Bulletin, Vol. III,
          pp. 18-21. Archaeological Society of Delaware.
     1942 Taxonomy and the Direct Historical Approach. American Antiquity, Vol.
          VIII, pp. 170-172.
     1943 Regarding Midwestern Archaeological Taxonomy. American Anthropolo-
          gist, n.s., Vol. XLV, pp. 313-315.
     1944      An Inaccurate Description of Midwestern Taxonomy. American Antiquity,
            Vol. IX, pp. 445-446,
242


MCKERN, W. C., T. DEUEL, and C. E. GUTHE
    1933   (No title) On Midwestern Taxonomic Method. National Research Council.
         (Mimeographed. )
MEAD, A. D.
      1939     The Species Complex in Biology and Education. Science, Vol. XC, pp. 241-
             246.
MEAD, MARGARET
     1928 Coming of Age in Samoa. (Included in: From the South Seas, 1939.) New
         York.
     1930 Growing Up in New Guinea. (Included in /bid.)
MEADOWS, PAUL
     1944 The Scientific Use of Historical Data. Philosophy of Science, Vol. XI,
             pp. 53-58.
MENGHIN,       0.
    1918       Die archdologische           Kartographie    am    nordlichen      Balkan.   Antropos,    Vol.
             XIII, pp.        1069-1081.
MERA, H. P.
     1935 Ceramic Clues to the Prehistory of North Central New Mexico. Bulletin
             No. 8, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical Series.
MERTON, R. K.
    1936a Civilization             and     Culture.   Sociology   and    Social    Research,    Vol.    XXI,
             pp.    103-113.
      1936b Review of “Primitivism and Related Ideas in Antiquity,’ by A. O.
           Lovejoy and George Boas. American Sociological Review, Vol. I, pp. 156-157.
MICHAELIS, A.
      1908         A Century of Archaeological Discoveries.             London.
MILLER, HUGH
     1939 History and Science. University of California Press, Berkeley.
MILLER, N. E., and J. DOLLARD
     1941 Social Learning and Imitation. Yale University Press, New Haven.
MITRA, P.
     1933 A History of American Anthropology. Calcutta University Press.
MONACHESI, E. D.
     1937 Sociology and Culture. In: Man and Society, E. P. Schmidt, ed., pp. 1-54.
             New York.
MONTESQUIEU, C. L. DE S.
      1748         L'Esprit    des Lois.    Paris.
MORGAN, L. H.
     1848 Report to the Regents of the University upon the Articles Furnished the
         Indian Collection. 3rd Annual Report, 1850. Regents of the University,
             Albany.
      1851      League of the Ho-De-No-Sau-Nee    or Iroquois. Rochester.
      1871      Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family. Contribu-
             tions to Knowledge, No. 17. Smithsonian Institution, Washington.
TAYLOR                        A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               243

MORLEY, S. G.
     1943 Archaeological Investigations of the Carnegie Institution of Washington
          in the Maya Area of Middle America, during the Past Twenty-eight Years.
          Proceedings, Vol. LXXXVI, pp. 205-219. American Philosophical Society.
MORRIS, E. H.
     1939 Archaeological Studies in the La Plata District. Publication No. 519, Car-
          negie Institution of Washington.
MORRIS, E. H., and R. F. BURGH
     1941 Anasazi Basketry. Ibid., No. 533.
MORRIS, E. H., J. CHARLOT, and «A. A. MORRIS
     1931    The Temple of the Warriors. Ibid., No. 406.
MULLER, S.
     1897 Nordische Altertumskunde. Strassburg.
MUNRO, ROBERT
     1894 On the Relation between the Erect Posture and the Physical and Intel-
          lectual Development of Man. Report, pp. 885-895. British Association for
          the Advancement of Science.
MURDOCK, 6. P.
     1932 The Science of Culture. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XXXIV,
            pp. 200-215.
     1940      The Cross-cultural Survey. American Sociological Review, Vol. V, pp. 361-
          370.
     1945    The Common Denominator of Cultures. In: The Science of Man in the
          World Crisis, R. Linton, ed., pp. 123-142. New York.
MURDOCK, 6. P., e¢ al
     1945 Outline of Cultural Materials. Yale Anthropological Studies, Vol. II.
MYRES, J. L.
     1916 The Influence of Anthropology on the Course of Political Science. Publica-
          tions in History, Vol. IV, pp. 1-78. University of California.
     1930    Who Were the Greeks? Berkeley.
NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
     1940 A. V. Kidder. International Directory of Anthropologists, Section I,
          Western Hemisphere, p. 78. Washington.
NELSON, N. C.
     1914 Pueblo Ruins of the Galisteo Basin, New Mexico. Anthropological Papers,
          Vol. XV, pp. 1-124. American Museum of Natural History.
     1937. Prehistoric Archaeology, Past, Present, and Future. Science, n.s., Vol.
          LXXXV, pp. 81-89.
NESBITT, P. H.
     1931 The Ancient Mimbrefios. Publications in Anthropology, Bulletin No. 4.
          Logan Museum, Beloit, Wis.
NEVILLE, R. C.
     1852 Saxon Obsequies. London.
NEVINS, ALLAN
     1938 The Gateway to History. Boston.
244

NUSBAUM, J. L.
     1922 A Basket Maker Cave in Kane County, Utah. Indian Notes and Mono-
         graphs. Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
OGBURN, W. F.
     1937    Culture and Sociology. Journal of Social Forces, Vol. XVI, pp. 161-169.
OLMSTEAD, A. T.
     1927. Anthropology and History. In: The Social Sciences, W. F. Ogburn, ed.,
          pp. 37-49. Boston and New York.
OPLER, M. E.
     1935 A Note on the Cultural Affiliations        -of Northern Mexican Nomads.
          American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XXXVII, pp. 702-706.
OSBORN, H. F.
     1929 From the Greeks to Darwin, 2nd ed. New York.
OSGOOD, CORNELIUS
     1942    The Ciboney Culture of Cayo Redondo, Cuba. Publications in Anthro-
          pology, No. 25. Yale University.
     1943    Excavations at Tocorén, Venezuela. /bid., No. 29.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY
     1935 Handbook to the University of Oxford. Oxford.
PARETO, V.
     1935 Mind and Society. New York.
PARKER, A. C.
     1922 The Archaeological History of New York. Bulletins 235 and 236. New
          York State Museum, Albany.
PARSONS, TALCOTT
     1937 The Structure of Social Action. New York.
     1938 The Role of Theory in Social Work. American Sociological Review, Vol.
             III, pp. 13-20.
PEET, S. D.
     1879 A Comparison between the Archaeology of Europe and America. The
         American Antiquarian, Vol. I, pp. 211-224.
PENNIMAN, T. K.
     1935 A Hundred Years of Anthropology. London.
PEPPER, G. H.
     1902 The Ancient Basket Makers of Southeastern Utah. Journal, Vol. II, No. 4,
             American   Museum   of Natural   History.
PHILLIPS, PHILIP
     1942 Review of “An Archaeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent
          Portions of the States of Alabama, Mississippi and Tennessee,’ by W. S.
          Webb and D. L. DeJarnette. American Antiquity, Vol. VIII, pp. 197-201.
PIGGOTT, STUART
     1937    Prehistory and the Romantic Movement. Antiquity, Vol. XI, pp. 31-38.
PIGORINI, L.
      1874     Materiaux pour Vhistorie de la paleoethnologie italienne. Parma.
TAYLOR                        A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                           245

PILSBRY, H. A.
     1939 Land Mollusca of North America. Philadelphia.
PIRENNE, HENRI
     1923 De Jinfluence allemande sur le mouvement historique         contemporaine.
            Scientia, Vol. XXXIV,   pp. 174ff.
     1931    What are Historians Trying to Do? In: Methods in Social Science, S. A.
          Rice, ed., pp. 435-445. University of Chicago Press.
PITT-RIVERS, A. H. LANE-FOX
     1869 Examination of the Hill Forts of Sussex with an Account of Excavations
          at Cissbury and Highdown. Archaeologia, Vol. XLII, pp. 27-52.
      1887-1898    Excavations in Cranborne Chase, near Rushmore, on the Border of
          Dorset and Wilts. London.
POLLOCK, H. E. D.
     1936a    The Casa Redonda at Chichen Itza, Yucatan. Contributions to American
          Archaeology, Vol. III, pp. 129-154. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1936b Round Structures of Aboriginal Middle America. Publication No. 471,
          Carnegie Institution of Washington.
POWDERMAKER, H.
     1939 After Freedom: a cultural study of the Deep South. New York.
     1945 Review of “The Origin and Function of Culture,” by G. Roheim. Ameri-
          can Anthropologist, Vol. XLVII, pp. 308-312.
POWELL, J. W.
     1875a The Ancient Province of Tusayan. Scribner’s Monthly, Vol. XI, pp.
         193-213.
    1875b    Exploration of the Colorado River of the West and Its Tributaries. Wash-
         ington.
    1877-1893 (ed.) Contributions to North American Ethnology. Geographical and
         Geological Survey of the Rocky Mountain Region. 7 vols. Washington.
    1879 On Limitations to the Use of Some Anthropologic Data. 1st Annual Re-
         port, pp. 73-86. Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington.
PRESTWICH, MRS.
      1899 Life and Letters of Joseph Prestwich, London.
PRIEST, JOSIAH
      1835 American Antiquities and Discoveries in the West, Sth ed. Albany.
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY
      1941    The University Catalogue. Princeton.
PROTHERO, G. W.
     1909 Historical Societies in Great Britain. Annual Report, pp. 237ff. American
           Historical Association.
PRUDDEN, T. M.
     1897 An Elder Brother to the Cliff Dwellers. Harper’s Monthly Magazine, Vol.
           XCV, June-November.
PUGIN, A. C. and E. J. WILLSON
     1850 Examples of Gothic Architecture. London.
246


RAFINESQUE, C. S.                                                                ares
     1824 Ancient Annals of Kentucky; or, Introduction to the History and Antiqui-
          ties of the State of Kentucky. In: The History of Kentucky, by H. Marshall,
          Vol. I. Frankfort.
RANDALL, J. H., JR.
     1940 The Making of the Modern Mind. Oxford.
REDFIELD, ROBERT
     1937a Introduction to Social Anthropology of North American Tribes, Fred
          Eggan, ed., pp. vii-xii. University of Chicago Press.
      1937b The Second Epilogue to Maya History. The Hispanic American Historical
           Review, Vol. XVII, pp. 170-181.
      1940 The Folk Society and Culture. American Journal of Sociology, Vol. XLV, pp.
           731-742,
REICHARD, GLADYS
     1936 Navaho Shepherd and Weaver. New York.
REINACH, S. M.
     1898 Esquisse d’une historie de l’archeologie gauloise. Revue Celtique, Vol. XIX,
             pp. 101-117, 292-307.
REITER, PAUL
     1938 Review of “Handbook of Northern Arizona Pottery Wares,” by H. S. Col-
             ton and L. L. Hargrave. American Anthropologisi, n.s., Vol. XL, pp. 480-491.
RHODES, J. F.
     1909 Historical Essays. New York.
RICKERT, H.
     1896-1902    Die Grenzen der Naturwissenschaftlichen Begriffsbildung, Sth ed.,
          1929. Tubingen.
     1898 Kulturwissenschaft und Naturwissenschaft, 4th and 5th eds., 1921.
             Tiibingen.
RICKETSON, 0. G., JR., and FE. B. RICKETSON
     1937 Uaxactun, Guatemala. Publication No. 477, Carnegie Institution of Wash-
             ington.
RINALDO, JOHN, and P. S. MARTIN
     1941    Review of “Winona and Ridge Ruin, Part I,” by J. C. McGregor. Ameri-
          can Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLIII, pp. 654-656.
RITCHIE, W. A.
     1930 Early Huron-Neutral Sand Knoll Sites in Western New York. Researches
          and Transactions, Vol. VII, pp. 62-78. New York State Archaeological Asso-
             ciation, L. H. Morgan Chapter.
      1932      The Lamoka Site. Jbid., pp. 79-134.
      1934      An Algonkin-Iroquois Site on Castle Creek, Broome   County, New York.
           Research Records, Vol. I1. Rochester Municipal Museum.
      1936a New Evidence Relating to the Archaic Occupation of New York. Re-
           searches and Transactions, Vol. VIII, pp. 1-23. New York State Archaeological
           Association, L. H. Morgan Chapter.
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 247

     1936b A Prehistoric Fortified Village Site at Canandaigua, Ontario County, New
           York. Research Records, Vol. III. Rochester Museum of Arts and Sciences.
     1940a New York State Prehistory Room. Museum Service, Vol. XIII, pp. 100-
           101. Rochester.
     1940 Two Prehistoric Village Sites at Brewerton, New York. Research Records,
           Vol. V. Rochester Museum of Arts and Sciences.
     1944 The Pre-Iroquoian Occupations of New York State. Memoir I, Rochester
           Museum of Arts and Sciences.
     1945a An Early Site in Cayuga County, New York. Researches and Transactions,
           Vol. X, New York State Archaeological Association, L. H. Morgan Chapter.
     1945b Review of The Fort Ancient Aspect, by J. B. Griffin. American Antiquity,
           Vol. X, pp. 398-401.
RIVERS, W. H. R.
     1920 ‘History and Ethnology.” History, July.
ROBERTS, F. H. H., JR.
      1929a_ Recent Archeological Developments in the Vicinity of El Paso, Texas.
           Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. LXXXI, No. 7. Smithsonian Institution.
     1929b     Shabik’eshchee Village, a Late Basket Maker Site in the Chaco Canyon,
           New Mexico. Bulletin 92, Bureau of American Ethnology.
      1930 Early Pueblo Ruins in the Piedra District, Southwestern Colorado. Bulletin
           96, Idem.
      1931    The Ruins at Kiatuthlana, Eastern Arizona. Bulletin 100, Idem.
      1932 The Village of the Great Kivas on the Zuni Reservation, New Mexico.
           Bulletin 111, Idem.
      1935 A Survey of Southwestern Archaeology. Annual Report, pp. 507-533. Smith-
           sonian Institution.
     1937     (No title). The Indianapolis Archaeological Conference, pp. 35-38. National
         Research Council, Division of Anthropology and Psychology, Committee on
         State Archaeological Surveys, Washington.
     1939 Archeological Remains in the Whitewater District, Eastern Arizona, Part
         I. Bulletin 121, Bureau of American Ethnology.
     1940 Archeological Remains in the Whitewater District, Eastern Arizona, Part
          II. [bid., Bulletin 126.
ROBERTS, H. B.
     1931    Problems in the Study of Maya Ceramics. Year Book, No. 30, pp. 114-116.
          Carnegie Institution of Washington.
ROBINSON, J. H.
     1911    The New History. Proceedings, Vol. L, pp. 179-190. American Philosophical
          Society.
     1912 The New History. New York.
     1930 The Newer Ways of Historians. American Historical Review, Vol. XXXV,
          pp. 245-255.
ROHEIM, GEZA
     1943 The Origin and Function of Culture. Nervous and Mental Disease Mono-
          graphs, No. 69. New York.
248

ROTH, W. E.                                                                            .
     1924 An Introductory Study of the Arts, Crafts, and Customs             of the Guiana
             Indians. 38th Annual Report,   1916-1917.   Bureau   of American Ethnology.
ROUSE, B. I.
     1939 Prehistory in Haiti, a Study in Method. Publications in Anthropology, No.
          21. Yale University.
     1944 On the Typological Method. American Antiquity, Vol. X, pp. 202-204.
ROUSSEAU, J. J.
     1750 Discours sur les sciences et les arts. Dijon.
     1762 Le contrat social. Amsterdam.
ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
     1929 Notes and Queries on Anthropology, 5th ed. London.
ROYS, L.
     1934 The Engineering Knowledge of the Maya. Contributions to American
          Archaeology, Vol. II, pp. 29-105. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
RUPPERT, K.
     1943 The Mercado, Chichen Itza, Yucatan. Contributions to American An-
          thropology and History, Vol. VIII, pp. 223-260. Carnegie Institution of Wash-
          ington.
SABINE, G. H.
     1906 Hume’s Contribution to the Historical Method. Philosophical Review, Vol.
             XV, pp. 17-38.
SALVEMINI, GAETANO
      1939 Historian and Scientist. Cambridge.
SAPIR, EDWARD
      1924 Culture, Genuine and Spurious. American Journal of Sociology, Vol. XXIX,
             pp. 401-417.
      1927   The Unconscious Patterning of Behavior in Society. In: The Unconscious:
          a symposium, E. S. Dummer, ed., pp. 114-142. New York.
    1938 Why Cultural Anthropology Needs the Psychiatrist. Psychiatry, Vol. I, pp.
          7-12.
SCHENCK, W. E.
     1926 The Emeryville Shellmound. Publications in American Archaeology and
          Ethnology, Vol. XXIII, pp. 147-282. University of California.
SCHENCK, W. E., and E. J. DAWSON
     1929    Archaeology of the Northern San Joaquin Valley. /bid., Vol. XXV, pp. 289-
             413.
SCHILLER, F. C. S.
     1934 Must Philosophers Disagree? London.
SCHLESINGER, A. M.
     1925 New Viewpoints in American History. New York.
     1937 What Social History Is. Harvard Educational Review, Vol. VII, pp. 57-65.
SCHLIEMANN, H.
     1878 Mycenae: a narrative of researches and discoveries in Mycenae and
         Tiryns. New York.
TAYLOR                       A STUDY        OF ARCHEOLOGY                           249

     1880 Ilios: the city and country of the Trojans. London.
     1885 Tiryns: the prehistoric palace of the kings of Tiryns. New York.
SCHMIDT, WILLIAM
     1939 The Culture Historical Method of Ethnology. Trans. by S. A. Sieber. New
          York.
                             ’
SCHOOLCRAFT, H. R.
     1853-1856      Information Respecting the History, Condition and Prospects of the
          Indian Tribes of the United States. Philadelphia.
SCHORR, P.
     1935 The Genesis of Prehistoric Research. Jsis, Vol. XXIII, pp. 425-443. Bruges.
SCHOULER, JAMES
     1896 Historical Briefs. New York.
SETZLER, F. M.
     1935    A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas. American Anthropolo-
          gist, n.s., Vol. XXXVII, pp. 104-110.
     1942 Archeological Accomplishments during the Past Decade in the United
          States. Journal, Vol. XXXII, pp. 253-259. Washington Academy of Sciences.
SETZLER, F. M., and J. D. JENNINGS
     1941 Peachtree Mound and Village Site, Cherokee County, North Carolina.
          Bulletin 131, Bureau of American Ethnology.
SHEPARD, A. 0.
     1936 The Technology of Pecos Pottery. In: “The Pottery of Pecos, Vol. II,”
          by A. V. Kidder and A. O. Shepard. Papers, No. 7, pp. 389-587. Southwestern
          Expedition.
     1939 Technology of La Plata Pottery. In: Archaeological Studies in the La
          Plata District, by E. H. Morris. Publication No. 519, Carnegie Institution of
          Washington.
     1942 Rio Grande Glaze Paint Ware. Contributions to American Anthropology
          and History, Vol. VII, pp. 129-262. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
SHOTWELL, J. T.
     1922 An Introduction to the History of History. New York.
     1929    History. In: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 14th ed., Vol. XI, pp. 594-598.
SIMEK, EMANUEL
     1914 Grundziige der Vorgeschichte Bohmens. Wiener Prahistorische Zeitschrift,
         Vol. I, pp. 22-38, 88-136.
SIMKOVITCH, V. G.
     1929-1936 Approaches to History. Political Science Quarterly, Vol. XLIV, pp.
         481ff.; Vol. XLV, pp. 481ff.; Vol. XLVII, pp. 410ff.; Vol. XLVIII, pp. 23ff.;
         Vol. XLIX,    pp. 44ff;      Vol   LI, pp.- 117i:
SIMPSON, G. G., and A. ROE
     1939 Quantitative Zoology. New York.
SIMPSON, J. H.
     1852 Journal of a Military Reconnaissance, from Santa Fe, New Mexico, to the
         Navaho Country. Philadelphia.
250


SMITH, A. L.
     1932. Two Recent Ceramic Finds at Uaxactun. Contributions to American
          Archaeology, Vol. II, pp. 3-25. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1937 Structure A-XVIII, Uaxactun. Jbid., Vol. IV, pp. 1-27.
SMITH, A. L., and A. V. KIDDER
     1943 Explorations in the Motagua Valley, Guatemala. Contributions to American
         Anthropology and History, Vol. VIII, pp. 101-182. Carnegie Institution of
         Washington.
SMITH, H. I.
     1899 The Ethnological Arrangement of Archaeological Material. Report          for
         1898, Sheffield Meeting. Museum Association of the United Kingdom.
SMITH, R. E.
     1937 A Study of Structure A-I Complex at Uaxactun, Peten, Guatemala. Con-
         tributions to American Archaeology, Vol. III, pp. 189-231. Carnegie Institu-
         tion of Washington.
SMITH, V. J.
     1931 Archeological Notes of the Big Bend Region. Bulletin 3, pp. 60-69.
          Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
      1932 The Relation of the Southwestern Basket Maker to the Dry Shelter Culture
          of the Big Bend. /bid., 4, pp. 55-62.
      1933 Sandals of the Big Bend Culture with Additional Notes Concerning Basket
          Maker Evidence. /bid., 5, pp. 57-65.
SMITH, WILLIAM
      1815 A Geological Map of England and Wales, with Part of Scotland. London.
SOROKIN, PETRIM
      1937 Social and Cultural Dynamics. New York.
      1943 Sociocultural Causality, Space, Time. Duke University Press, Durham.
SPECK, F. G.
      1935 Speaking of the Delawares. The Pennsylvania Archaeologist, Vol. IV, No.
          4. Milton.
SPIER, LESLIE
      1917 An Outline for a Chronology of Zuni Ruins. Anthropological Papers, Vol.
          XVIII, pp. 207-332. American Museum of Natural History.
      1918     Notes on Some Little Colorado Ruins. Jbid., pp. 333-362.
      1919     Ruins in the White Mountains. /bid., pp. 363-387.
      1921     The Sun Dance of the Plains Indians. Ibid., Vol. XVI, pp. 459-527.
      1929      Problems Arising from the Cultural Position of the Havasupai. American
             Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XXXI, pp. 213-222.
SQUIER, E. G.
     1849 Aboriginal Monuments of the State of New York. Contributions to Knowl-
          edge, Vol. II. Smithsonian Institution.
 SQUIER, E. G., and E. H. DAVIS
      1848     Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley. /bid., Vol. I.
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 251

STAFFORD, C. E.
     1941 Paracas Embroideries, a Study of Repeated Patterns. New York.
STEEFEL, L. D.
     1937 History. In: Man and Society, E. P. Schmidt, ed., pp. 305-322. New York.
STEMMERMANN, P. H.      |
     1934 Die Anfdnge der Deutschen Vorgeschichtsforschung. Leipzig.
STERN, B. J.
     1929      Concerning the Distinction between the Social and the Cultural. Journal of
            Social Forces, Vol. VIII, pp. 264-273.
 STEWARD, J. H.
      1941     Review of “Prehistoric Culture Units and Their Relationships in Northern
            Arizona,” by H. S. Colton. American Antiquity, Vol. VI, pp. 366-367.
      1942 The Direct Historical Approach to Archaeology. /bid., Vol. VII, pp. 337-
            344,
      1944 Re Archaeological Tools and Jobs. /bid., Vol. X, pp. 99-100.
STEWARD, J. H., and F. M. SETZLER
      1938 Function and Configuration in Archaeology. /bid., Vol. IV, pp. 4-10.
STOCKY, A.
      1924 Le développement de la science préhistorique tchéque. Anthropologie, Vol.
            II, Supplement, pp. 45-56. Praha.
STRONG, W. D.
      1935 An Introduction to Nebraska Archeology. Miscellaneous Collections, Vol.
            XCIII, No. 10. Smithsonian Institution.
      1936 Anthropological Theory and Archaeological Fact. In: Essays in Anthro-
            pology presented to A. L. Kroeber. University of California Press, Berkeley.
STRONG, W. D., W. E. SCHENCK, and J. H. STEWARD
      1930 Archaeology of the Dalles-Deschutes Region. Publications in American
            Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. XXIX, pp. 1-154. University of California.
STUBBS, WILLIAM
      1886 Seventeen Lectures on the Study of Medieval and Modern History and
            Kindred Subjects. Oxford.
SUMMERS, MONTAGUE
     1941 A Gothic Bibliography. London.
SUTHERLAND, R. L., and J. L. WOODWARD
     1940 Introductory Sociology, 2nd ed. Chicago.
SYMONDS, J. A.
     1908 Renaissance Italy. New York.
TALLGREN, A. M.
     1922 Zur Archiologie Eestis I. Acta et Commentationes, Vol. III, No. 6; Vol.
           VIII, No. 1. University of Dorpat.
     1937. The Method of Prehistoric Archaeology. Antiquity, Vol. XI, pp. 152-161.
TANNER, THOMAS
     1744 Notitia Monastica, or an account of all the abbies, priories and houses of
           friars, heretofore in England and Wales; and also of all the colleges and hos-
           pitals founded before A.D, 1540. London.
252


TAYLOR, W. W.
     1943 Review of “A Reconstruction of Uto-Aztekan History” and “Report on
         the Archaeology of Southern Chihuahua,” by R. R. Zingg. American Antiquity,
         Vol. VIII, pp. 307-310.
TEGGART, F. J.
     1916 Prolegomena to History; the Relation of History to Literature, Philosophy,
         and Science. Publications in History, Vol. IV, No. 3. University of California.
     1918 The Processes of History. Yale University Press, New Haven.
     1919 Anthropology and History. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scien-
              tific Method, Vol. XVI, pp. 691-696.
     1925 The Theory of History. Yale University Press, New Haven.
THOMAS, W. I., and F. ZNANIECKI
     1918-1920  The Polish Peasant in Europe and America. 5 vols. University of Chi-
              cago Press.
THOMPSON, A. H.
    1935 Bede, His Life, Times, and Writings. Oxford.
THOMPSON, J. E.
      1927.   The Civilization of the Mayas. Anthropological Leaflets, No. 25. Field
           Museum of Natural History, Chicago.
     1934a      Maya Chronology: the Fifteen Tun Glyph. Contributions to American
           Archaeology, Vol. Il, pp. 243-254. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1934b The Sky Bearers, Colors, and Directions in Maya and Mexican Religion.
           Ibid., pp. 209-242.
     1939a Excavations at San José, British Honduras. Publication No. 506, Carnegie
           Institution of Washington.
     1939b The Moon Goddess in Middle America: with Notes on Related Deities.
           Contributions to American Anthropology and History, Vol. V, pp. 127-173.
           Carnegie Institution of Washington.
      1942a Late Ceramic Horizons at Benque Viejo, British Honduras. /bid., Vol.
           VII, pp. 1-36.
     1942b      Maya Arithmetic. Jbid., pp. 37-62.
      1942c Representations of Tezcatlipoca at Chichen Itza. Notes on Middle Amer-
           ican Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. I, pp. 48-50. Carnegie Institution of
           Washington.
      1943     Representation of Tlalchitonatiuh at Chichen Itza, Yucatan, and at Baul,
           Escuintla. 7bid., pp. 117-121.
      1944 The Fish as a Maya Symbol for Counting and Further Discussion of Direc-
           tional Glyphs. Theoretical Approaches to Problems, No. 2. Carnegie Institu-
            tion of Washington.
      1946 Some Uses of Tobacco among the Maya. Notes on Middle American
           Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 111, No. 61. Carnegie Institution of Wash-
            ington.
 TOYNBEE, A. J.
            1934-1939    A Study of History. 6 vols. London.
TAYLOR                            A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              253


TRIK, Ay Ss
     1939    Temple XXII at Copan. Contributions to American Anthropology and
          History, Vol. V, pp. 87-106. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
TSCHOPIK, HARRY
     1937    Textiles Motifs from Uloa Valley Pottery, Ms. Peabody Museum of Har-
          vard.
UEBERWEG, FRIEDRICH
     1872-1874     History of Philosophy. Trans. by G. S. Morris. New York.
UNDSET, INGWALD
     1887 Le préhistorique Scandinave, ses origines et son developpement. Revue
          d’Anthropologie, 3° serie, Vol. II, pp. 313-332.
UNIVERSITE DE PARIS
     1939      Livret de l’Etudiant, 1939-1940.
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
     1940  General Catalogue. Berkeley.
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
     1940  The College and the Divisions.
UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH
     1939 Edinburgh University Catalogue, 1939-1940.
UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL
     1938      Calendar,    1938-1939.
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
     1939  The Calendar.
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
     1940  The College: Announcement. Philadelphia.
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
     1940 General Announcement, 1940-1941. Bulletin, Madison.
VAIHINGER, HANS
     1925   The Philosophy of “As-If.” Trans. by C. K. Ogden. New York.
VAILLANT, G. C.
     1930      Excavations at Zacatenco. Anthropological   Papers, Vol. XXXII,   No.     1.
             American Museum of Natural History.
     1941  Aztecs of Mexico; Origin, Rise and Fall of the Aztec Nation, Garden City.
VAN LOON, W. H.
     1937  The-Arts. New York.
WALLIS, W. D.
     1917 The Influence of Anthropology upon History. Scientific Monthly, Vol. V,
             pp. 433-438.
     1937. Social Anthropology. In: Man and Society, E. P. Schmidt, ed., pp. 92-143.
         New York.
WARDEN, C. J.
     1936 The Emergence of Human Culture. New York.
WARE, C. F. (ed.)
     1940 The Cultural Approach to History. Columbia University Press, New York.
254

WARING, A. J., and P. HOLDER
     1945 A Prehistoric Ceremonial Complex in the Southeastern United States.
         American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol. XLVII, pp. 1-34.
WARNER, W. L., and P. S. LUNT
     1941 The Social Life of a Modern Community. Yale University Press, New Haven.
WAUCHOPE, ROBERT
     1934 House Mounds of Uaxactun, Guatemala. Contributions to American Archae-
         ology, Vol. II, pp. 107-171. Carnegie Institution of Washington.
     1938 Modern Maya Houses. Publication No. 502, Carnegie Institution of Wash-
             ington.
WEBB, W. S.
     1938 An Archaeological Survey of the Norris Basin in Eastern Tennessee. Bulletin
         118, Bureau of American Ethnology.
     1939 An Archaeological Survey of Wheeler Basin on the Tennessee River in
         Northern Alabama. Bulletin 122, Idem.
     1941 The Morgan Stone Mound, Site 15, Bath County, Kentucky. Reports in
         Anthropology and Archaeology, Vol. V, No. 3. University of Kentucky.
     1942 The C. and O. Mounds at Paintsville, Sites Jo2 and Jo9, Johnson County,
         Kentucky. Jbid., No. 4.
      1943a    The Crigler Mounds, Sites Be 20 and Be 27, and The Hartman Mound,
          Site Be 32, Boone County, Kentucky. /bid., No. 6.
     1943b The Riley Mound, Site Be 15, and the Landing Mound, Site Be 17, Boone
          County, Kentucky, with additional notes on the Mt. Horeb Site, Fa 1, and
          Sites Fa 14 and Fa 15, Fayette County. /bid., No. 7.
WEBB, W. S., and D. L. DE JARNETTE
     1942 An Archeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
          the States of Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Bulletin 129, Bureau of
          American Ethnology.
WEBB, W. S., and J. B. ELLIOTT
     1942 The Robbins Mounds Sites Be 3 and Be 14, Boone County, Kentucky.
          Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, Vol. V, No. 5. University of Ken-
          tucky.
WEBB, W. S., and W. D. FUNKHOUSER
     1928 Ancient Life in Kentucky. Kentucky Geological Survey, Frankfort.
     1929a The So-Called “‘Hominy-holes” of Kentucky. American Anthropologist,
          n.s., Vol. XX XI, pp. 701-709.
     1929b The Williams Site in Christian County, Kentucky. Reports in Archaeology
          and Anthropology, Vol. I, No. 1. University of Kentucky.
     1931 The Tolu Site in Crittenden County, Kentucky. Jbid., No. 5.
     1940 Ricketts Site Revisited, Site 3, Montgomery County, Kentucky. Reports
          in Anthropology and Archaeology, Vol. III, No. 6.
WEBB, W. S., and W. G. HAAG
     1939 The Chiggerville Site, Site 1, Ohio County, Kentucky. Reports in Anthro-
       pology, Vo. IV, No. 1.
      1940      Cypress Creek Villages, Sites 11 and 12, McLean County, Kentucky. Jbid.,
             No. 2.
TAYLOR                        A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               255

WEBB, W. S., and C. E, SNOW
     1945 The Adena People.     Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, Vol. VI.
WEBSTER’S NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY
     2nd ed., 1937 Springfield, Mass.
WEDEL, W. R.            ’
     1941a Archeological Investigations at Buena Vista Lake, Kern County, Cali-
          fornia. Bulletin 130, Bureau of American Ethnology.
     1941b    Environment and Native Subsistence Economies in the Central Great
          Plains. Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 101, No. 3. Smithsonian Institution.
     1943 Archeological Investigations in Platte and Clay Counties, Missouri. Bulletin
          183, United States National Museum.
WEST, J.
     1945 Plainville, U.S.A. Columbia University Press, New York.
WHEELER, G. M.
     1875-1889  Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One
         Hundredth Meridian, in Charge of First Lieutenant Geo. M. Wheeler .        .
         under the Direction of the Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army. 7 Vols. Washing-
         ton.
WHIPPLE, A. W.
     1856 Report of Explorations for a Railway Route, near the Thirty-fifth Parallel
            of North Latitude from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean .. . 1853-
            1854. Vol. III of the Pacific Survey Reports, Senate Executive Documents,
            No. 78, 33rd Congress, 2nd Session. Washington.
WHITE, A. D.
     1896 A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom.
         London.
WHITE, LESLIE
     1940 The Symbol: the Origin and Basis of Human Behavior. Philosophy of
         Science, Vol. VII, pp. 451-463.
     1943 Energy and the Evolution of Culture. American Anthropologist, n.s., Vol.
          XLV, pp. 335-356.
     1945a    “Diffusion vs Evolution”: an Anti-evolutionist Fallacy. /bid., Vol. XLVII,
          pp. 339-356.
     1945b History, Evolutionism, and Functionalism: Three Types of Interpretation
          of Culture. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. I, pp. 221-248.
WHITEHEAD,      A. N.
     1927      Science and the Modern   World.   New   York.
WHO’S    WHO    IN AMERICA
     1944-1945      A. V. Kidder. Vol. XXIII, p. 1149. Chicago.
WILSON, DANIEL
     1863 Prehistoric Annals of Scotland. 2nd ed. London.
WILSON, THOMAS
     1899 The Beginnings of the Science of Prehistoric Anthropology. Proceedings,
         pp. 309-353. American Association for the Advancement of Science.
256

WINCKLEMANN, J. J.
     1763-1768   Geschichte der Kunst des Altertums. In: Sémtliche Werke, Vols. III-
          VI. Donauéschingen, 1825.
WISSLER, CLARK
     1913 The North American Indians of the Plains. The Popular Science Monthly,
         Vol. LXXXII, pp. 436-444.
     1915 Riding Gear of the North American Indians. Anthropological Papers, Vol.
          XVII, pp. 1-38. American Museum of Natural History.
     1916 Psychological and Historical Interpretations for Culture. Science, n.s., Vol.
              XLII, pp. 193-201.
      1923.Man and Culture. New York.
      1938 The American Indian. 3rd ed. New York.
      1942 The American Indian and the American Philosophical Society. Proceedings,
        Vol. LXXXVI, pp. 189-204. American Philosophical Society.
WOODWARD, J. W.
    1936 A New Classification of Culture. American Sociological Review, Vol. I,
              pp. 89-102.
WRIGHT, THOMAS
      1885 The Celt, the Roman, and the Saxon. 4th ed. London.
WYLIE, WILLIAM
      1852 Fairford Graves. Oxford.
WYMAN, L. C., and Cc. KLUCKHOHN
      1938 Navaho Classification of Their Song Ceremonials. Memoirs, No. 50, Ameri-
           can Anthropological Association.
YALE UNIVERSITY
      1939 General Catalogue Number. Bulletin. New Haven.
ZILSEL, E.
      1941 Physics and the Problem of Historico-sociological Laws. Philosophy of
              Science, Vol. VIII, pp. 567-579.
ZIMMERMAN, C. C.
     1938 The Changing Community. New York.
ZINGG, R. R.
     1939 A Reconstruction of Uto-Aztekan History. Contributions to Ethnography,
          Vol. II. University of Denver.
     1940 Report on Archaeology of Southern Chihuahua. Contribution I, University
          of Denver, Center of Latin American Studies.
ZNANIECKI, F.
     1934 The Method of Sociology. New York.
                                                                                                           257


                                                          INDEX


Adams, J.: commended by J. W. Bennett,                            —method, 150—51, 157
   91                        ’                                    —problems, 7, 154, 155, 156. See also
Affinities, 95, 113-14, 117, 118, 122                               Problem
Agassiz, Louis, 18                                                —report: procedures using conjunctive ap-
Age of Enlightenment, 14                                            proach outlined,     152—98; summarized,
American Anthropologist, 26                                         202
Americanist archeologists, 46, 47, 94, 95                         —research: theoretical should relate to ac-
—archeology: scope of analysis, 6, 25;                              tual, 5; conceptual scheme for, prompted
  condition, 6, 45—94; theoretical frame-                           study, 5; practical procedures for, 6, 7,
  work, 8, 11; genesis, 21; antiquarian re-                         152—202; chronological development
   search,      22-23;      early    Americanists,                  of, 11—24; considered historiography,
   22—23; development, 23; research un-                             43; chronology’s role, 62—63; inter-
   der anthropology, 23; subject matter, 25;                        pretation and inference needed, 70-71,
   disagreement in aims, 25-27; sub-                                T3y TAS AS IN Se 122 Da 2S lave
   discipline cultural anthropology, 25—26;                         157-58, 193; Comparative approach
   93-94; objectives historical, 26; ques-                          for, criticized, 95; dependence on spe-
  tions      about,   26—27;        weaknesses       in             cialists, 200—201
  structure, 27; critical examination pro-                        —stratigraphy,    16, 182
  posed, 45; criterion for judging, 45; re-                       —studies, 85, 86, 117, 123-24, 125, 139,
  ports criticized, 45; selected works ana-                          140
  lyzed and criticized, 47—90; major role                         —taxonomists,      131—32,   134, 142
  of ceramic studies, 54; selected works                          —taxonomy,       147, 150
  commended, 90-93; time-space lim-                               —techniques,     157, 198-99
  its,    92;   dichotomy     within       conceptual             —theory, 145
  structure, 93; unhealthy state, 94; typo-                       —typology, 87, 115-24
  logical classifications, 124—42; groups,                        Archeologist(s): must focus on objectives,
  145; need for method of reference for                              7—8; theoretical framework, 8; separa-
  specific finds, 196—97; subsidized tech-                          tion within ranks, 24; as technician, 43,
  nical research needed, 201. See also                              155, 198—99; gathering of cultural ma-
  Archeology                                                        terials of utmost importance, 44; criteria
Andrews, E. W.: Maya work, 54                                       for selecting Americanists, 45; primary
Anthropologist(s), 6, 23, 27, 28, 30, 37-                           data breakdown, 98; limited to material
   44 passim, 95, 109, 143                                          results of behavior, 113; interested in
Anthropology, 6, 23, 26, 28, 29, 30, 32-                            cultural context, 122; empirical catego-
  47 passim, 61, 68, 71, 75, 94, 95, 98,                            ries important, 122—23; “objectivity”
   124, 143, 145, 193, 202                                          and “empirical” cited, 123—24; must
Antiquarianism, 11-17, 19, 23-24, 202                               deal with inferential, 124; demonstrably
Antiquarianist, 35                                                  significant criteria for, 143; primary ob-
Archeological apprenticeship, 198—200                               ligation, 147; working method summa-
—classification,      87,   115,    143.     See also               rized, 147; hypotheses, 148
  Archeological typology; Classification;                         —using conjunctive approach: destroys
  Cultural classification; Typological clas-                        original record, 154; must preserve all
  sification; Typology                                              empirical data, 155; must publish in-
—cultural context,       114-15,      171                           ferential bases, 156, 194
—data, 96, 113-15, 117; 133, 140, 154,                            Archeology: development as field of study,
   1553 159 1O7aNBat8i, 1855 191193;                                3—44; analysis of, in U.S., 45—94; con-
  202                                                               junctive approach and, 96; development
—ethnography, 170                                                   of concept of culture for, 97-112; crite-
—ethnology, 168                                                     rion of sharing discussed, 103, 104,
materials             145, 97,105.)         du2,.1 13;              105; binomial classification, 148, 149,
  130, 131, 141, 143, 144, 145, 156-63                              150, 151; taxonomy in, 150; excavate
  passim, 190, 192, 195—96                                          for complete record, 154, 155
258


                                                     INDEX


                                                             Classification(s): archeological, 115; use
—using conjunctive approach: can “do”
  historiography, 180; can construct cul-                       of Strong’s and Kidder’s stone, criti-
  tural contexts, 180; must construct full-                    cized, 126; use of Kidder’s bone, criti-
  est cultural contexts, 202                                   cized, 130; fallacy of basing, on pres-
Archetype,      120, 156
                                                               ence-absence   trait lists, 132, 140;
                                                               Gladwin-Colton, 138, 142; Southwest,
Beals, R. L., G. W. Brainerd, and W.                           Midwest,      criticized,    141;   Linnaean,
   Smith: commended, 93, 130                                   142-51;      premise    of conjunctive       ap-
Beard, C. A., 30                                                proach, 148; archeology needs more,
Becker, Carl, 36                                                151. See also Archeological classifica-
Bennett, J. W.: commended, 91; cited, 172                       tion; Cultural classification; McKern
Bennett, W. C.: commended, 92                                   classification; Southwest classification;
Bernheim, Ernest, 28                                            Typological classification; Typology
Berr, Henri, and L. Febvre, 28, 32                           Classificatory units, 139, 143-44
Bidney, David, 109                                           Coahuila, Mexico: U.S. National Museum
Binomial classification, 148—51                                 excavations, 104, 134, 159, 197; exam-
Boas, Franz, 12, 38, 39, 161                                    ples from, cited using conjunctive ap-
Boucher de Perthes, 18-19                                       proach, 159-63, 167, 172-73, 174-
Bradford, A. W., 22                                             75, 186-87, 190
Brainerd, G. W.: Maya program, 53, 56                        Cohen, M. R., and Ernest Nagel, 31,
Brand, D. D., 26                                                 157-58
Brew, J. O., 9, 10, 127, 129-30,              132,           Cole, F. C., and T. Deuel: work com-
   142, 144, 151                                                mended, 93; cited, 133, 141
Brinton, Crane, 10, 23, 26, 40                               Collins, Henry, 9, 45
Buckle, He Ee 3                                              Colton,   H.   S.:   work     commended,       93;
Bury, J. B., 33                                                cited, 137, 141, 165-66
Butler, Mary: commended,           57                        —and L. L. Hargrave, 128
                                                             Comparative (ethnology): used in con-
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Maya                       junctive approach outline for study of
  program: unique position of Thomp-                           relationships between cultural contexts
   son’s tobacco paper, 9, 51, 57; Kidder                      as wholes,      153,   168—69;      mentioned,
   and, 46, 50, 60—62; criticized by Kluck-                     181
      hohn,   50,   62;   publications   analyzed,           Comparative (taxonomic) approach, 7, 79,
   50—63; papers commended, 51, 56-57,                          83, 88, 89-90, 95-96, 137-41, 147,
  60, 63, 92; publications criticized,                          165, 191, 202
   51-58, 62, 63, 65, 67, 88; field work                     —chronicle(s), 34, 62, 67, 71, 75, 89, 90
   criticized, 54, 55, 57, 58-59, 59-60.                     —data, 62, 185, 190, 191-93
   See also Kidder; Roys; Thompson                           —method, 38, 67
Categories, 87, 114-15, 116, 122-26,                         —studies, 55, 61, 67, 69, 79, 89-90, 95,
    168. See also Cultural categories; Em-                      134, 137, 147, 168-69, 190, 192, 193,
   pirical categories                                           196
Chaco Canyon, N.M.: conjunctive ap-                          Comte, 38, 40
   proach applied, 175—80, 181, 183                          Concept of culture: greatest contribution
Chamberlain, L. J., and E. A. Hoebel, 26                        of cultural anthropology to Study of
Chronicle, 61—62, 67, 71, 89-90, 95, 96                         Man,   37; early evolutionists       and,    38;
Chronology, 48, 49, 54—56, 62-63, 67,                           agreement on, necessary, 97; necessary
   69, 89, 90                                                   to conjunctive approach, 97; develop-
Clark, G.: presentation commended,             170              ment of, for archeology, 97-110. See
Clark, K., 12-13                                                also Culture
Class, 121-22. See also Type and class                       Conceptual     scheme,      5, 7, 30, 112,     115,
Classical and Near Eastern archeology, 11,                      120, 202
      Mey yl Ey, 2                                           Conceptual structure, 5, 7, 8, 93
                                                                                                            259


                                                     INDEX


Configuration,  115-16,   117, 120-21,                         ture; Holistic concept; Partitive concept;
   154, 156, 159-63           s                                Study of culture
Conjunctive approach: defined, 7; con-                       —categories, 116, 122—23, 131
  trasted with comparative approach, 7,                      —classifications, 95, 123-24
  95—96; primary aims, 95—96; premise                        —classifications    of Southwest     and Mid-
   of, 96; attitude defined, 96, 159; con-                     west,   132-40,     141.   See also McKern
   cept of culture necessary for, 97; pres-                     and Southwest classifications
   ence-absence trait lists, limited function                —complex (trait complex), 14                 eliiss
   for, 147, 168; practical means of attain-                    132-33
   ment presented, 152—98; levels and                        —configuration, 160-63
  sub-levels of procedure, 152; Table 4,                     —context, 38, 39, 111, 112, 113
   153; order of discussion, 152, 154; ap-                   —relationships, 143
  plications from author’s unpublished                       —traits, 111, 112, 120, 131, 145, 165—
  work, 152, 159-63, 174-75, 175-80,                            66, 182
   181, 183, 186-87; interpretations both                    Cushing-Fewkes stage, Southwestern ar-
  justified and required, a premise of,                         cheology, 46, 67
   157; two tenets for comparisons, 168;                     Customs, 19-20. See also Mankind
  primacy of cultural context, 180; actual
  {i.e., non-arbitrary] stratigraphy, first                  Darwin, Charles R., 19, 20
   tenet of, 182; second tenet, all cultural                 Data: in conjunction approach, 96, 154,
   materials   be   preserved    or   fully    re-              155,   157-58,     159,   167;   levels   and
   corded, 182; requires increased finan-                      sub-levels of procedure for conjunctive
   ces, 198; practical considerations, 198—                    approach, 153, 181-98. See also Ar-
   202; summary, 202                                           cheological   data;   Qualitative  data;
Context,   38, 67, 111-12,       112-13.      See              Quantitative data
  also Cultural context(s)                                   Discipline, scientific, 5, 25, 129
Cosgrove, H. S., and C. B. Cosgrove,                         Disciplines: historical, 27, 32, 37
   187, 188                                                  Dollard, John, 103
Cramer, G. F.: Maya measures, 57; com-
  mended, 92                                                 Empirical categories, 114-15,       116, 122—
Cressman, L. S., 127                                            23, 196
Cresson, F. M.: commended, 57                                —data, 146
Croce; B31                                                   —form,    1177 193,195
Cultural, 31                                                 —type, 128-29, 195
—anthropology, 17—27 passim, 32, 36—                         English Industrial Revolution, 14, 18
   41, 42, 43, 46, 48, 93-94                                 Ethnography(ies),      41,   43,    113,     170,
—categories,     114-15,    116, 122—23,      126,              171-72
   (Sai LOS ml 72                                            Ethnological goal, 89
—conjunctives, 95, 173, 197                                  Ethnologists, 20, 21, 106, 108, 134
—content(s), 87—88,        100                               Ethnology, 20, 40, 43, 44, 98. See also
—context(s), 34, 39, 41, 42—43, 57, 60,                         Cultural anthropology
   65, 72-73, 76, 78, 79, 81, 87, 96, 112,                   Evolution, 5, 20, 21, 37
   113, 122, 137, 144, 147, 150, 151, 154,
   165, 167, 169, 172, 175, 180, 185, 189,                   Fairbanks, C. H.: commended,         93; cited,
   192, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198, 202. See                       133
  also Archeological cultural context                        Falconer, 19
—evolution, 20—21                                            Fewkes, J. W. See Cushing-Fewkes
—form, 117                                                   Flint, Robert, 29, 31
—matrix, 169, 172, 175                                       Ford, C. S., 45
—trait, 109                                                  Forde;'G. D.;.32
Culture, 20, 38, 41, 97-111, 130, 143,                       Form, 115, 116, 117, 123, 124, 128, 138,
   185, 195-96. See also Concept of cul-                       193. See also Empirical form; Cultural
260


                                                       INDEX


   form                                                           106, 109, 110, 130. See also Culture
Fort Ancient Aspect. See Griffin                               Holmes, W. H., 43
Freeman, E. A., 32, 33                                         Hulme, E. M., 39
Frightful Cave, Coahuila: conjunctive ap-
  proach, applied, 134-37,           174-75, 190,              Idea(s):; 101-111   passim,   118, 120, 123,
  198; mentioned, 183                                            130, 131,    143, 166. See also Mental
                                                                 construct
Gamio: Maya area, 58                                           Idiosyncratic trait versus shared, 98, 99,
Geology, 5, 18, 25                                                106, 107, 108, 109
Gibbon, 32, 34, 64                                             Inherent groupings. See Groupings
Gladwin, H. S., 69, 70
Gladwin-Colton system, 138, 142                                Jameson, J. F., 33, 39, 65
Goldenweiser, A. H., 100                                       Jefferson, Thomas, 22
Goldsmith, W. M., 98                                           Johnson, Frederick: criticism     of Ritchie,
Gothic Revival, 14, 17                                            82
Griffin, J. B.: cited, 26, 141, 142, 156,                      Judd, N. M., 127
   184; statement of aims lacking, 75;
   influenced eastern archeologists, 82;                       Kaminaljuyu: cited, 55; choice of excava-
  works analyzed, criticized, 82-89, 137;                         tion site criticized, 58—59
  comparative     approach,   88, 89-90;                       Kelley, J. Charles, 10
  writes chronicle, 90; typology, 132; use                     Kelly, W. H., 10
  of complex, 133; Fort Ancient Aspect,                        Kidder, A. V.: archeology defined, 46; re-
  classic      example,     taxonomic      method,               oriented Carnegie’s Maya program, 46;
      139-40                                                     influence on Southwestern archeology,
Groupings       (Groups),     125,      131,    132,             46, 67; aims of archeology and anthro-
      141—47 passim                                              pology, 46; significant statement on an-
Guernsey, S. J., 162                                             thropology, 47; relation of statements to
—and Kidder: Marsh Pass reports, ana-                            contributions of field work examined,
   lyzed, criticized, 49-50. See also Kid-                       47—48; works criticized, 47—48; Pecos
      der and Guernsey                                           work criticized, 48, 50; emphasis on
                                                                 chronology, 48, 49, 62—66, 67; Carne-
Hallowell, A. I., 186, 187                                       gie’s Maya field work and publications
Hargrave, Lyndon, 9; and Colton, 128                             accomplished under his direction exam-
Harrison, W. H., 22                                              ined and compared with aims of, 50—
Haury, E. W.: statement of aims lacking,                         62; Maya work criticized, 50—57 pas-
   68, 75; work analyzed, criticized, 68—                        sim, 61—62; men under, in field, cited,
      71; writes chronicle, 71                                   51-55; predilection for grandiose, 57—
—reports analyzed, criticized: Canyon                            58, 62; factors responsible for character
   Creek, 68-69; Mogollon, 69, 163—64;                           of archeological work, 62—67; findings
   Snaketown, 69-70; Forestdale, 71                              not placed in context of culture, 67; De-
Hill, W. W., 165                                                 velopment of Maya Research closer to
Historian(s), 30, 34, 42, 96, 112, 134, 143                      historiography, 67; work summarized,
Historical approach, 145-46                                      67; contributions recognized, 67; writes
Historical reconstruction, 32, 35-36                             chronicle, 67, 71; stone and bone classi-
Historiography(ies),        31-43     passim,    47,             fications, 126; mentioned, 127, 156
   48, 50, 61, 63, 65, 67, 71, 95, 96, 112,                    —and Guernsey: influence of publication,
   113, 124, 145, 193, 202                                       49; Marsh Pass reports, analyzed and
History, 5, 6, 24, 26-32, 39, 44, 47,                            criticized, 49-50; cited, 172. See also
   66-67, 94, 202                                                 Guernsey and Kidder
Holder, P.: commended         by J. W. Bennett,                —and Shepard, 55
      91                                                       —and Thompson: archeology defined, 46
Holistic concept, 98, 99, 100, 103, 105,                       Kluckhohn, Clyde, 8, 9, 50, 62, 115, 116,
                                                                                                   261


                                               INDEX


  120MI2 IV IS3511605 161                                Si
—and Kelly, 102, 103, 109, 110                         Maya program. See Carnegie Institution
—and Reiter, 148                                       Meadows, Paul, 32
Kohn, A., and C. Mehlis, 16                            Mental construct, 98, 100—102,       109, 110,
Krieger, Alex, 118, 119                                   112, 118, 121, 182. See also Ideas
Kroeber,   A. L., 20—21,    26, 29, 36, 40,            Method, 8, 73
  94, 98, 165, 197                                     Midwest(ern)     (taxonomic)     classification
Kubler, George: commended,      92                        (system). See McKern classification
Kulturgeschichte, 33, 34                               Mill, 157
                                                       Miller, Hugh, 158
La Barre, Weston,     106                              Mimbres pottery: conjunctive approach
Landa, Bishop, 52                                         applied to life forms on, 187—89
Wesser, Au, 36, 158                                    Mississippi Valley, 54, 75, 172, 184
Lewis, T. M. N., 184                                   Mogollon, 69, 163-64
—and Kneberg: reported commended,         9;           Mooney, 106
   not in study, 9                                     Morgan, 23
Linnaean classification, 142—51                        Morris, E. H.: Maya area, 57
Linton, Ralph,   26, 28, 36, 39, 96, 100,              Murdock, G. P., 103, 105, 111, 114, 171
   102-103, 114-18 passim, 132, 133,                   Museum of Northern Arizona, 165
   115)
Local chronology: used in conjunctive ap-              Nelson, N. C., 46, 67, 68
  proach   for analysis and chronological              Nesbitt, P. H., 187
  relationships within site, 153, 181, 202             New History, 33, 39, 65
Lothrop: Maya sculptures, 58                           Nusbaum, J. L., 49
Loud, L. L., and M. R. Harrington,      134,
   162                                                 Objectification(s) of culture, 104, 108,
Lovelock Cave, Nevada, 134, 162                           LeU             SEMI   Set Vea Seal Si
Lowie, R. H., 38, 40, 98, 156                             195
Lyell, Charles, 18, 19                                 Objectivity, 85, 86, 123-24, 125, 139,
Lynd, H. M., 41                                           Wey, AO
Lynd, R. S., 41                                        Opler, M. E., 133
                                                       Origin of Species, 18
McGregor, J. C., 49                                    Osgood, Cornelius: cited, 10; commended,
McKern, W. C., 26, 130—48 passim                         93
—Midwest(ern) (taxonomic) classification
   (system), 75-90, 132, 133, 139, 141,                Paleolithic (pre-Neolithic),   17—19
   142, 147, 148, 149, 184                             Partitive concept, 98, 99, 100, 109, 110,
Maler: Maya area, 63                                      130
Malinowski, B., 36, 39, 101, 105                       Pattern, 120, 130
Man: the study of, 27, 28, 29, 30, 37; uni-            Pecos. See Kidder
  versal history of, 28, 29, 30; the science           Penniman, T. K., 28
  of, 29                                               Pepper, G. H., 49
Mandelbaum, Maurice, 42, 157                           Phillips, Philip, 137-38
Mankind, 19—20, 100                                    Philology, 12
Marsh Pass. See Guernsey and Kidder,                   Pirenne, Henri, 35, 96
   Kidder and Guernsey                                 Pitt-Rivers, A. H. Lane-Fox,     14—15
Martin, P. S.: commended by J. W. Ben-                 Pollock, H. E. D.: Maya paper, 51; criti-
  nett, 91; and Rinaldo, 127                             cized, 57
Mason, O. T., 23                                       Powdermaker,    H., 100
Material culture, 95, 102                              Powell, J. W., 23, 26
Maudslay: Maya area, 63                                Prehistory (Prehistoric archeology), 19
Maya: non-Carnegie archeologists      cited,           Pre-Neolithic. See Paleolithic
262


                                                 INDEX



Presence-absence. See Trait lists                          tial contribution of, 56—57, 92
Problem: in report using conjunctive ap-
  proach, 153, 154-56, 202                               Sapir, Edward, 39, 102, 139
Prudden, T. M., 49                                       Schlesinger, A. M., 32—33
Putnam, 23, 26                                           Schliemann, H., 12, 16
                                                         Setzler, F M., 9, 10, 75
Qualitative data, 138                                    —and Jennings: commended, 93
Quantification of data, 69, 73, 74, 78,                  Shepard, A. O.: Pecos, 48, 184—85; Maya
   81-82, 85-86, 114, 137, 169                              ceramic technology, 56; commended,
Quantitative analysis, 168, 169, 172-73,                    174, 184-85
   182, 183                                              Shotwell, J. T., 32, 34, 35
Quantitative data, 134, 137, 138, 170                    Smith, A. L.: and Kidder, 53, 57; Maya
                                                            ceramics, 54, 55
Radcliffe-Brown, 39                                      Smith, H. I.: commended, 93
Rafinesque, C. S., 22                                    Smith, R.: Uaxactun criticized, 55
Raleigh, 18                                              Social sciences, 99
Ranke, 32, 33, 34, 64                                    Society for Applied Anthropology, 41
Reed, Erik, 10                                           Southwest(ern) classification (system) (tax-
Reichard, Gladys, 174                                      onomic system), 131, 138, 141, 142,
Reiter, Paul, 10, 127                                       147, 149. See also Gladwin-Colton
Relationships, 112                                       Southwestern archeology, 46, 49, 54, 67,
Ricketson, O. G., Jr., and E B. Ricketson:                 68. See also Comparative chronicle
  Uaxactun, 52, 53, 54, 126                              Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 26
Ries, Maurice, 10                                        Speck, F. G., 156
Ritchie, W. A.: statement of aims lacking,               Spencer, 38, 40
   75; compared with Webb, 79-80; influ-                 Spier, Leslie, 10, 40, 46, 67, 68, 151, 165
  enced by Midwestern classification, 80,                Staatengeschichte      (Staatsgeschichte),   33,
  82; works cited, evaluated, 80, 82; data                 64-65
  adequate for reader to make syntheses,                 Stafford, C. E.: commended, 92—93
      80; inferences made, 80; interpretations           Stallings, W. S., 10
      given, 80-81; criticism of, 81, 82, 184;           Steefel, Ls D., 30
      some data quantified, 81-82; compara-              Steward, J. N., 26, 132, 142, 150
      tive approach, 82; Pre-Iroquoian mono-             —and Setzler, 7
      graph, submersion in taxonomic system,             Stimulus diffusion, 165
      82; use of culture complex,   133; men-            Strong, W. D.: cited, 98; criticized, 124—-
      tioned, 184, 185                                      26
Roberts, F. H. H., Jr.: cited, 10, 162, 172;             Stubbs, William, 33
  statement of aims lacking, 68, 75; work                Study of culture, its nature and workings:
  in Southwest analyzed, criticized, 68,                    heading, outline of conjunctive ap-
  71-74, 172; excellent work in architec-                   proach, 153, 156—67; examples of how
  ture, 71; writes comparative chronicle,                   culture may be derived from archeologi-
  71; Kiatuthlanna, 72-73; Village of                       cal material, 159-67; summary, 167
  Great Kivas, 72—73; Piedra District, 73;               Synthesis and context: syntheses of ar-
  quantitative on occasion, 73; occasional                  cheological data, cultural and quantita-
   inferences made, 73-74; Whitewater                       tive, 170; used in annotated outline for
   District, 74                                             conjunctive approach, 170—80; aids for
Roberts, H. B.: Maya program, 53, 56                        constructing context, 171-72; cultural
Robinson, J. H., 28, 33, 39-40                              inferences   from     quantitative   analysis,
Romantic Movement, 13, 17                                   172-73; cultural conjunctives within
Rouse, B. I., 115-19 passim                                 site neglected, 173; analysis on basis of
Royal Anthropological Institute, 171                        quality, 174; substantiating examples of
 Roys, L.: Maya paper cited, 51; substan-                   conjunctives between people and envi-
                                                                                                     263


                                                INDEX


  ronment,      174-75;   “cultural   matrix”             Archeological typology
  part of context, 175; interpretation of
  growth of two Chaco rooms, 175-80                     Underhill, Ruth, 10
                                                        United States National Museum, Coahuila
Taxonomic approach. See Comparative ap-                   Expedition. See Coahuila
  proach; Griffin                                       Universal culture patterns, 171
Taxonomists, 132, 139, 142                              Ussher, Archbishop, 17, 18
Taxonomy(ies), 77, 133, 142-43,          144,
   150                                                  Vaillant, G. C.: cited, 26; Chichen,     53;
Taylor, W. W., 169                                         commended, 91
Technique, 8
Teggart, F. J., 38                                      Wallis, W. D., 39
Theory, 8, 62, 67, 122, 123                             Waring, A. J.: cited by J. W. Bennett, 91
Thompson, J. E.: contribution of Maya to-               Warner, W. L., 41
   bacco paper, 9, 51, 57; additional papers            Wauchope, Robert: Uaxactun, 52
   commended, 51, 56—57, 60, 63, 92;                    Webb, W. S.: statement of aims lacking,
   Benque Viejo, 52—53; cited, 54, 55, 62,                75; works cited, 75-76, 77-78, 141;
  66, 156                                                 works commended, 75—76; works criti-
Time and space relationships, 68, 69, 71,                 cized, 76-79; influenced by McKern
  74 I5,, 19 88, 92,95, 96, 105, 133,                     classification, 77—78; summary of, 79
   138, 142                                             —and C. E. Snow: mortuary customs
Tozzer, 9                                                 poorly reported, 184
Trait(s), 98, 102—109, 111-12, 165-66                   Wedel, W. R.: cited, 10, 126; commended,
—complexes. See Culture complex                           90-91
—lists, Presence-absence, 68, 76—79 pas-                Whitehead, A. N., 99
   sim, 87, 132—40, 147, 151, 168-69                    Willey, Gordon,   10
Trik, A. S.: Maya program, 53                           Wincklemann, J. J., 12, 16
Tschopik, Harry: commended, 57                          Wissler, Clark, 23, 26, 28, 165, 169
Tylor, 38, 39                                           Wyman,   L. C., and C. Kluckhohn,      197
Type ntlS altos IZ
—and class, 115—22,       123, 124, 129, 130,           Zimmerman, C. C.: cited, 121
   131, 138, 141, 195                                   Zingg, R. R.: comparative studies criti-
Typological classification(s), 124-42                      cized, 168—69; review by Taylor, 169
Typology, 82, 115, 124—30, 144. See also                Znaniecki, F., 30
                 |   meee            te
                      Tt         Pe:




             !
:      i
    mipes   Spe i
                     +;
                          ae
                          Fn Oy a4
                                     ae4




                                           =                  ;     <
                                           >   =©        at       eee
                                                                        y, 4
                                                    »é   > Sire                2
                                                                   Tv
     MG            rtd                       WE MANG
    Na   MAUNA
             iu(NUERANNNN
                      analAUNuA neMnvoce
                                    deas
|    Wnt         MIN)      lt                          \


            NN NMA Coney sala Neils
     \ NA ay                ANN   ASA Wh


           Vb Dhabas
                   db, ALED DAD MUYAYIEL4A
