The domestication
and exploitation of
plants and animals
         ed by Peter J. Ucko
          G.W. Dimbleby




  If    Vi-     tfMlL            'j
  t 1,1 zS&WYjfr
           W'Jm?
           J
       V, * mi' ’>r m! '//'■• #vJfr
                                      J X’j.' vJL
                                                    if w.it't'pA
                                                    ■till
 NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE




THOMAS J. BATA LIBRARY
  TRENT UNIVERSITY
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
             in 2019 with funding from
             Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/domesticationexpOOOOrese
The domestication and exploitation of
plants and animals
The domestication and
exploitation of
plants and animals

edited by
PETER J. UCKO
and
G. W. DIMBLEBY

Proceedings of a meeting of the
Research Seminar in Archaeology and Related Subjects
held at the Institute of Archaeology, London University




111^=111

Aldine • Atherton, Inc.
Chicago/New York
                                  s




(c) Research Seminar in Archaeology and
Related Subjects, 1969




All rights reserved. No part of this publication
may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopy, recording, or any information storage
and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publisher.




First published in ig6g by
Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd.
and
Aldine Publishing Company
52g South Wabash Avenue
Chicago, Illinois 60605
ISBN 0-202-33030-3


Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: jo-8jg45


Made and printed in Great Britain by
The Garden City Press Limited, Hertfordshire, England
       Contents

Preface                                                                      ix
List of Participants                                                        xiii

       Introduction
Peter J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby: Context            and development of
                                           studies of domestication         xvii
W. F. Grimes: On co-operation                                             xxiii

       Part One        Origins of Domestication
       section one       Environmental background
David R. Harris: Agricultural systems, ecosystems        and the origins^
                  of agriculture                                              3
J. G. Hawkes: The ecological background of plant domestication               ll
C. Vita-Finzi : Geological opportunism                                       31
W. van Zeist: Reflections on prehistoric environments in the Near
               East                                                          35
Daniel Zohary: The progenitors of wheat and barley in relation to
                 domestication and agricultural dispersal in the Old
                 World                                                       47

       section two       Patterns of exploitation
C. D. Darlington: The silent millennia in the origin of agriculture          67
Kent V. Flannery : Origins and ecological effects of early domesti¬
                    cation in Iran and the Near East                         73
P. A. Jewell: Wild mammals and their potential for new domestica¬
              tion                                       7                  101
I. G. Simmons: Evidence for vegetation changes associated with
                  mesolithic man in Britain                                 113


       Part Two        Methods of Investigation
       SECTION ONE      Domestication and exploitation of plants
J. Alexander: The indirect evidence for domestication 3                     123
D. M. Dixon: A note on cereals in ancient Egypt                             131
Arlette Leroi-Gourhan: Pollen grains of Gramineae and Cerealia
                          from Shanidar and Zawi Chemi                      143
J. M. Renfrew: The archaeological evidence for the domestication
               of plants: methods and problems                              149


                                                    3M684
      vi    Contents

      Ralph Riley: Evidence from phylogenetic relationships of the types
                   of bread wheat first cultivated                            173
      William C. Sturtevant: History    and ethnography of some West
                              Indian starches                                 177
      M. Villaret-von Rochow : Fruit size variability of Swiss prehistoric
                                       Mains sylvestris                       201

               section TWO     Domestication and exploitation of animals
\ '        J. Berry: The genetical implications of domestication in animals   207
           Bokonyi: Archaeological problems and methods of recognizing
  ^                    animal domestication                                   219
      Raymond E. Chaplin: The use of non-morphological criteria in the
                         study of animal domestication from bones
                         found in archaeological sites                        231
  B. A. L. Cranstone: Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethno¬
                       graphy                                                 247
^P. Ducos: Methodology and results of the study of the earliest
            domesticated animals in the Near East (Palestine)                 265
  Caroline Grigson: The uses and limitations of differences in
                     absolute size in the distinction between the bones
                     of aurochs (Bos primigenius) and domestic cattle
                              (Bos taunts)                                    277
      Sebastian Payne : A  metrical distinction between sheep and goat
                        metacarpals                                           295
      H. S. Smith : Animal domestication and animal cult in dynastic Egypt    307


               Part Three     Regional and local evidence for domestication
    F. R. Allchin: Early domestic animals in India and Pakistan               317
    F. R. Allchin: Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan              323
    J. Burton-Page: The problem of the introduction of Adansonia
                      digitata into India                                     331
    Juliet Clutton-Brock: Carnivore remains from the excavations of
                             the Jericho Tell                                 337
    G. W. I. Hodgson: Some difficulties of interpreting the metrical data
                        derived from the remains of cattle at the Roman
                       settlement of Corstopitum                              347
    Maria Hopf: Plant remains and early farming in Jericho                    355
  • Charles A. Reed : The pattern of animal domestication in the pre¬
                      historic Near East                                      361
    Ruth Tringilam: Animal domestication in the neolithic cultures of
                     the south-west part of European U.S.S.R.                 381
    William Watson: Early animal domestication in China                       393
    William Watson: Early cereal cultivation in China                         397


               Part Four     Studies of particular taxonomic groups
               SECTION ONE    Plants
      J. Alexander and D. G. Coursey: The origins of yam cultivation          4° 5
      A. Krapovickas: The origin, variability and spread of the groundnut
                           (Arachis hypogaea)                                 427
                                                              Contents    vii

Barbara Pickersgill : The domestication of chili peppers                 443
J. Smartt : Evolution of American Phaseolus beans under domestica¬
            tion                                                         451
W. R. Stanton : Some domesticated lower plants in South East Asian
                 food technology                                         463

       section two     Animals
M. S. Drower: The domestication of the norse                             471
J. G. Evans: The exploitation of molluscs                                479
Duncan Noble: The Mesopotamian onager as a draught animal                485
Clifford Owen : The domestication of the ferret                          489
M. L. Ryder : Changes in the fleece of sheep following domestication
              (with a note on the coat of cattle)                        495

       Part Five    Human nutrition
N. A. Barnicot: Human nutrition: evolutionary perspectives             /(52a
D. R. Brothwell: Dietary variation and the biology of earlier human        '
                 populations                                             531
John Yudkin: Archaeology and the nutritionist                            547

       Conclusion
Stuart Piggott                                                           555

General Index                                                            561
Index of Sites and Localities                                            571
Index of Authors                                                         575

The plates are between pp. 550 and 55X
      Preface

The domestication of plants and animals was one of the greatest steps for¬
ward taken by mankind, and although it was first achieved so long ago we still
need to know what led to it and how, and even when, it took place. Only when
we have this understanding will we be able to appreciate fully the important
social and economic consequences of this step. Even more important, an
understanding of this achievement is basic to any insight into modern man’s
relationship to his habitat. In the last decade or two a change in methods of
investigating these events has taken place, due to the mutual realization by
archaeologists and natural scientists that each held part of the key and neither
alone had the whole. Inevitably, perhaps, the floodgate which was opened has
resulted in a spate of new knowledge which is scattered in the form of
specialist reports in diverse journals.
   A meeting of the Research Seminar in Archaeology and Related Subjects was
held on 18th and 19th May 1968 at the Institute of Archaeology, London
University, to discuss the Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and
Animals. This meeting was called so that workers in the archaeological,
anthropological, and biological fields could bridge the gap between their
respective disciplines by personal contact and discussion. The enthusiastic
response in itself underlined this need, and the range of papers contributed
together forms the most complete coverage available of the subject as a whole.
Modern techniques and the result of their application to the classical problems
of domestication, selection, and spread of cereals and of cattle are discussed,
but so are comparable problems in plants and animals which have not pre¬
viously been considered in this context.
   As is the practice with these seminars, the papers were all circulated before¬
hand and this book consists of these papers revised by their authors in the
light of the discussions which took place. In addition we include several
papers which were submitted by participants after the meeting and arose
directly from it; these are the contributions by Professor N. A. Barnicot, Mr.
S. Payne, Dr. M. L. Ryder, Dr. C. Vita-Finzi, and Dr. W. van Zeist. Pro¬
fessor C. D. Darlington and Dr. P. Ducos were prevented from attending the
seminar and so their papers were not discussed in detail at the meeting.
Furthermore, as a result of the seminar, our attention was drawn to the
important paper by Dr. A. Krapovickas on the groundnut, which we have
x    Preface

pleasure in including in this volume in an English translation by Dr. J
Smartt of the Department of Botany of the University of Southampton.
We feel that there is a need for a collective work to indicate just where
research does stand on the wide front covered by the title of this work and we
hope that this book will meet this need.
    At the actual seminar meeting we asked Professor S. Piggott to perform
the superhuman task of providing a concluding paper to the two-day
proceedings. Although Professor Piggott was not asked to summarize the
whole content of the symposium, and indeed this would have been an
impossible request, we make no apologies for placing his revised contribution
as the general conclusion to this book. We have left this particular paper in the
style and format of its original presentation at the seminar.
    Although we realize that there are differing opinions on taxonomic nomen¬
clature we have found it necessary to standardize and simplify the usage
throughout this book. In particular we have omitted references to authorities
and we have adopted the binomial nomenclature for both botanical and
zoological names. We have followed this procedure in all cases except where
sub-specific differences are discussed (e.g. Dr. Glutton-Brock’s review of Canis
remains from Jericho). This simplification was acceptable to the majority
of the contributors but we must record that Dr. Ducos would strongly
have preferred to have retained the trinomial system (see note 5 on pp. 274-5).
We have also had to standardize orthography of sites (e.g. Munhata,
Mureybat, etc.).
    It will be obvious to the reader that the re-circulation of individual papers
and ultimate compilation of this volume has involved an enormous amount of
secretarial work. This has been carried out singlehanded by Miss Susan
Elizabeth Johnson to whom any expression of thanks must be inadequate. We
should also like to thank Mr. Peter Pratt, one of the Seminar’s regular
members, for generously offering his services for producing Figs. 1-7 on pp.
252-9 and Figs. 1-2 on pp. 474-6 in this book.
    Perhaps we may be excused for concluding this Preface on a note of
informality. In the happy atmosphere in which this meeting took place
we were delighted to find that two of our participants were born poets.
We conclude this Preface with their masterpieces, without any editorial
comment.
                                                          Preface   xi

We understand nothing but know much
We plant the seed and know of the harvest
We know our women, to have sons after the reaping,
Children growing after a cycle of harvests,
To watch the flocks and know of flocks unborn.
Born from yesterday we give birth to tomorrow
From the earth, life; from the earth
We take earth, that is life, and make it live
With our fingers, loving the earth, making life
From the mother goddess of earth
From the mother goddess of life.
                                       (Charles A. Reed)


                  South American Idyll
              The courtship of the llama
              Embarrasses the farmer.
              But it copulates far sooner
              Than the kinkier vicuna.
                           (Stuart Piggott)


                                                  Peter J. Ucico
                                                  G. W. Dimbleby
                                                  London ig68
     List of participants

J. P. Alcock (Department of Roman Archaeology, Institute of Archaeology,
   London)
J. Alexander (Department of Extra-Mural Studies, University of London)
B. Allchin (Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, Cambridge)
F. R. Allchin (Institute of Oriental Studies, Cambridge)
A. Ammerman (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of Archae¬
   ology, London)
E. Anati (Centro di Studi Prehistorici, Valcamonica, Italy)
P. Ashbee (Consultant to the Inspectorate of Ancient Monuments, Ministry
   of Public Building and Works, London)
M. Avery (Department of Archaeology, Belfast)
G. H. A. Bankes (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of
   Archaeology, London)
N. A. Bamicot (Department of Anthropology, University College London)
R. J. Berry (Department of Biology, Royal Free Hospital Medical School,
   London)
L. Biek (Inspectorate of Ancient Monuments, Ministry of Public Building
   and Works, London)
I. M. Blake (Balliol College, Oxford)
H. Bohlken (Institut fur Haustierkunde der Universitat, Kiel)
S. Bokonyi (Magyar Nemzeti Muzeum, Budapest)
D. M. Boston (Horniman Museum, London)
H. C. Bowen (Royal Commission for Historical Monuments—England)
W. Bray (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of Archaeology,
   London)
D. R. Brothwell (Sub-department of Anthropology, British Museum—
   Natural History—London)
J. Burton-Page (Department of India, Pakistan and Ceylon, School of
   Oriental and African Studies, London)
E. Carmichael (Department of Ethnography, British Museum, London)
H. J. Case (Department of Antiquities, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford)
F. Celoria (Department of Archaeology, University of Keele)
R. E. Chaplin (Passmore Edwards Museum, London)
A. T. Clason (Biologisch-Archaeologisch Instituut, Rijksuniversiteit, Gron¬
   ingen)
xiv   List of participants

J. Close-Brooks (Institute of Archaeology, Oxford)
J. Clutton-Brock (Department of Human Environment, Institute of Archae¬
  ology, London)
A. M. Copping (Department of Nutrition, Queen Elizabeth College, London)
I. W. Cornwall (Department of Human Environment, Institute of Archae¬
  ology, London)
D. G. Coursey (Tropical Products Institute, London)
B. A. L. Cranstone (Department of Ethnography, British Museum, London)
G. Danisman (Department of West Asiatic Archaeology, Institute of Archae¬
  ology, London)
C. Delano Smith (Department of Geography, University of Nottingham)
G. W. Dimbleby (Department of Human Environment, Institute of Archae¬
  ology, London)
D. M. Dixon (Department of Egyptology, University College London)
R. A. Donkin (Department of Geography, University of Birmingham)
M. S. Drower (Department of Ancient History, University College London)
A. Evans (School of Agriculture, Cambridge)
J. G. Evans (Department of Human Environment, Institute of Archaeology,
  London)
N. P. Evans (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of Archae¬
  ology, London)
B. Field (Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, Cambridge)
C. A. Fisher (Department of Geography, School of Oriental and African
  Studies, London)
K. V. Flannery (Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann
  Arbor)
C. D. Forde (Department of Anthropology, University College London)
P. J. Fowler (Department of Extra-Mural Studies, University of Bristol)
J. P. Garlick (Department of Anthropology, University College London)
C. Grigson (Department of Human Environment, Institute of Archaeology,
  London)
W. F. Grimes (Institute of Archaeology, London)
J. W. Haldane (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of Archae¬
   ology, London)
R. Harcourt (Consultant Osteologist, Ministry of Public Building and Works,
  London)
D. R. Harris (Department of Geography, University College London)
J. G. Hawkes (Botany Department, University of Birmingham)
C. B. Haycraft (Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd., London)
F. N. Hepper (Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, Surrey)
V. P. Hewetson (Department of Botany, University of Durham)
E. S. Higgs (Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, Cambridge)
H. W. M. Hodges (Department of Conservation, Institute of Archaeology,
  London)
                                                    List of participants   xv

G. W. I. Hodgson (Northern Counties College, Newcastle-upon-Tyne)
M. Hopf (Romisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum, Mainz)
S. C. Humphries (Warburg Institute, London)
J. B. Hutchinson (School of Agriculture, Cambridge)
G. Jenkins (Plant Breeding Institute, Cambridge)
A. C. Jenny (Department of Botany, British Museum—Natural History—
  London)
E. R. Jewell (Department of Western Asiatic Archaeology, Institute of
  Archaeology, London)
P. A. Jewell (Department of Zoology, University College London)
S. E. Johnson (Institute of Archaeology, London)
R. Layton (Department of Anthropology, University College London)
Arlette Leroi-Gourhan (Centre de Recherches Prehistoriques et Proto-
  historiques, Paris)
H. G. Lloyd (Field Research Station, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
  Food, Worplesdon, Surrey)
T. Molleson (Sub-department of Anthropology, British Museum—Natural
  History—London)
P. Morton-Williams (Department of Anthropology, University College London)
J. P. Moss (Department of Agricultural Botany, University of Reading)
M.-J. Mountain (Department of Archaeology, University of Edinburgh)
D. S. Noble (Department of Western Asiatic Archaeology, Institute of
  Archaeology, London)
B. A. Noddle (Department of Pharmacology, University of Strathclyde)
T. P. O’Brien (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of Archae¬
  ology, London)
C. E. Owen (City of Leicester Museums and Art Gallery)
J. P. Owen (J. P. Coy)
A. C. Pal (Department of Indian Archaeology, Institute of Archaeology,
  London)
S. Payne (Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, Cambridge)
P. Phillips (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of Archaeology
  London)
B. Pickersgill (Department of Agricultural Botany, University of Reading)
S. Piggott (Department of Archaeology, University of Edinburgh)
J. R. Pilcher (Palaeoecology Laboratory, Queen’s University, Belfast)
P. Pratt (Department of Architecture and Civic Design, Greater London
  Council)
E. Pyddoke (Institute of Archaeology, London)
C. A. R.eed (Department of Anthropology, University of Illinois at Chicago
  Circle)
H. Reichstein (Institut fur Haustierkunde der Universitat, Kiel)
C. Renfrew (Department of Ancient History, University of Sheffield)
J. M. Renfrew (Department of Ancient History, University of Sheffield)
xvi   List of participants

R. Riley (Plant Breeding Institute, Cambridge)
B. K. Roberts (Department of Geography, University of Durham)
A. Rosenfeld (Department of British and Medieval Antiquities, British
 Museum, London)
M. J. Rowlands (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of
 Archaeology, London)
M. L. Ryder (Animal Breeding Research Organisation, Edinburgh)
G. de G. Sieveking (Department of British and Medieval Antiquities, British
  Museum, London)
I. G. Simmons (Department of Geography, University of Durham)
J. Smartt (Department of Botany, The University, Southampton)
H. S. Smith (Department of Egyptology, University College London)
M. S. Smith (Department of Nutrition, Queen Elizabeth College, London)
W. G. Solheim (Department of Anthropology, University of Hawaii, Honolulu)
M. Speight (Department of Human Environment, Institute of Archaeology,
  London)
M. G. Spratling (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of
  Archaeology, London)
W. R. Stanton (Tropical Products Institute, London)
W. T. Stearn (Department of Botany, British Museum—Natural History—
  London)
W. C. Sturtevant (Office of Anthropology, Smithsonian Institution, Wash¬
  ington)
R. E. Tringham (Department of Archaeology, University of Edinburgh)
J. Turner (Department of Botany, University of Durham)
P. J. Ucko (Department of Anthropology, University College London)
M. Villaret-von Rochow (Musee de Botanique, Lausanne)
C. Vita-Finzi (Department of Geography, University College London)
T. Watkins (Department of Archaeology, University of Edinburgh)
W. Watson (Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art, School of Oriental
 and African Studies, London)
A. C. Western (Department of Forestry, Oxford)
J. Williams (Department of Anthropology, University College London)
J. Yudkin (Department of Nutrition, Queen Elizabeth College, London)
W. van Zeist (Biologisch-Archaeologisch Instituut, Rijksuniversiteit, Gron¬
 ingen)
D. Zohary (Department of Botany, Hebrew University of Jerusalem)

      Additional Papers from
C. D. Darlington (Botany School, Oxford)
P. Ducos (Centre de Recherches d’Ecologie et de Prehistoire, St. Andre de
   Cruzieres, France)
A. Krapovickas (Facultad de Agronomia y Veterinaria, Universidad Nacional
  del Nordeste, Corrientas, Argentina)
      PETER J. UCKO and G. W. DIMBLEBY

      Introduction: Context and development of
      studies of domestication

Mankind took an immensely long time to learn how to gain food by any other
means than hunting, fishing and gathering. Our record of manufactured
tools goes back over one million years but evidence of domesticated animals
and plants only starts at a date somewhere near the end of the European Ice
Age, i.e. after c. 10,000 b.c.
  So much is fact revealed by archaeological investigation, and this general
picture has been long accepted. Two beliefs which do not often receive
explicit formulation today but are generally held serve to explain the back¬
ground to these data; both beliefs are probably overstated and in need of con¬
siderable revision and yet both probably still have something of importance to
say about human cultural evolution. The first states1 that only after a con¬
siderable time and after considerable cultural experience would man have
“learnt” to demand the satisfaction of many culturally derived “needs”. In
other words, during the first millennia of his existence man would have been
content with the satisfaction of his basic (and in most cases, biological) needs
—such as hunger/food and cold/warmth—and would have only gradually
developed those demands, sometimes called secondary needs, which call for
more sophisticated cultural responses—such as handles for equipment, com¬
fortable as well as serviceable dwellings, clothing as well as the camp fire. This
belief has been neatly summarized in the adage “needs breed needs”. The
second belief states2 that while man lives by hunting, fishing and gathering
alone he has little additional time to devote to “luxury” cultural activities, for
the greatest part of his day is devoted to searching for food to prevent starva¬
tion. In other words, it is held by many prehistorians that only with settled
life can develop the characteristics of “civilized” life—such as specialization of
labour, accumulation of surplus, sophistication of religious and ritual belief
and practice. Both these beliefs can be criticized; in the first place it is only the
material equipment found in excavations which can support the claim that it
would take several millennia for cultural “development” to emerge and this
actual evidence is sadly deficient because of (1) the paucity of material known;
(2) conditions of preservation, which make it likely that any material of
xviii   Introduction   ucko and dimbleby

organic nature has long since perished and that this material is scarcely ever
found during excavations; and (3) the fact that material culture and cultural
sophistication may not reflect each other. In the second case it is now estab¬
lished that not all hunters and gatherers live at a subsistence level near to
starvation conditions; as Hole and Flannery3 have summarized it: “No group
on earth has more leisure time than hunters and gatherers, who spend it
primarily on games, conversation and relaxing.” The hunters and gatherers of
the Upper Palaeolithic certainly had the time, skill and sophistication to
decorate weapons, tools and caves with paintings, engravings and low-
reliefs4 ; the Hadza women of Tanzania require, on a yearly average, only about
two hours in the day for necessary subsistence activities; the Bushmen only
make use of a (culturally) selected number of edible berries within the terrain
which they occupy; the North-west coast Indians of America are able to rely
on their fish supplies to the extent of being able to build large and complex
wooden houses in which they live for a considerable part of the year; some
groups of Australian aborigines, despite their extremely limited natural
resources and their basically “Stone Age” technology, have devised one of the
most complex of metaphysical systems of belief held by any human group
and have the “time” and interest to decorate rock shelters and material
equipment and to celebrate elaborate ritual occasions.
   It is in the context of these widely held beliefs and the archaeological fact of
a long-lived hunting and gathering tradition that we can best understand and
evaluate the claim that the cultural stage when man first became settled in one
place and was able to depend on animals and plants which he had domesti¬
cated represented a major “revolution” in human cultural development.
Commonly this was held to be the stage in development when mankind began
to develop those “luxury” activities such as pottery and weaving which
characterize the subsequent history of man, and equally the stage in develop¬
ment when religious, social and economic activities really began to flourish.
It was Professor V. Gordon Childe who first termed the phrase “Neolithic
Revolution” in an attempt to highlight this vital stage in human develop¬
ment ; previously the definitions of stages in cultural development had rested
almost exclusively on the nature of the material objects found in excavations
(and collected together in museum collections) with little regard to the
economic and social activities which might be taken to reflect and
epitomize.
  It is important to recognize that, whatever the various beliefs and theories
associated, we are confronted with facts revealed by archaeological research
that show that man did manage to change his economic way of life, did
manage to settle in one spot and did manage to live in a radically different way
from his predecessors and that all this did happen for the first time many
thousands of years before Christ. As archaeological discoveries have become
more frequent, and as absolute dating methods have been developed, so have
our ideas changed as to when exactly this event may first have occurred. It
                                       Development of domestication studies    xix

now seems clear that these events must be dated somewhere between 9000
and 7000 years b.c., dates which are much older than anything previously
envisaged.
   For a long time prehistorians have grappled with the problem of why and
how this vital change from nomadic to settled life took place. To Childe the
clue lay in the “climatic crisis that ended the pleistocene epoch; the melting of
the northern ice sheets . . .”5, and the subsequent change of environmental
conditions. Thus, already some time ago, it became clear that studies of
domestication could no longer rely exclusively on archaeological data but
would have to combine the findings of botanists, zoologists and environ¬
mentalists. Botanists and plant geographers have tried to draw conclusions
from the present-day distribution and genetical constitutions of domesticated
and wild species of plants but for a long time corroborative facts from the
past were rarely found. Several theories have arisen regarding the extent and
degree of desiccation which was thought to have followed the Pleistocene
period in the Near East and these theories assumed great importance in the
light of the locations of several very early sites found only quite recently. It
has, for example, been argued that the location of the early “neolithic” site of
Jarmo indicates that the wild animals and plants necessary for the first
attempts at domestication moved into the hilly flanks of the Fertile Crescent
as a response to more desiccated conditions. Others hold that the early
“pre-pottery neolithic” site of Jericho shows that plants and animals, as well
as humans, responded to the increased desiccation by moving to oases. This
repeated emphasis on desiccation as the last full-glacial gave way to the
Post-glacial has until recently had little direct evidence to support it. It was
probably a rationalization of the observed distribution of these early agricul¬
tural sites with the assumption that a full-glacial period in the north and
west of Europe would be matched by a pluvial climate in the south-east, so
that the subsequent Post-glacial would consequently be drier in that region. It
is so easy to think of climatic changes mainly in terms of precipitation,
whereas the only overall primary factor is radiant energy, which will be
reflected in temperature changes. Precipitation may increase or decrease as
temperature rises, according to the geographical situation.
  As more direct evidence is obtained, this belief in the pluvial nature of the
climate during the Wiirm glaciation is being seriously questioned. There is
accumulating evidence that in the Mediterranean basin and in the Zagros
Mountains the climate was arid and cold during Wiirm II; pollen analyses
indicate Artemisia steppe6. The transition to the Post-glacial is marked by
increasing humidity, and relatively humid conditions persisted throughout
the first half of the Post-glacial period. It is perhaps significant that the most
recently discovered of the very early large agricultural sites, £atal Hiiyuk, has
moved attention away from direct effects of desiccation and has focused
interest on an area, Anatolia, which had not previously been included within
the classic Fertile Crescent. We are coming to realize that an apparent
xx   Introduction   ucko and dimbleby

increase of aridity, as suggested by archaeological and agricultural criteria,
should not necessarily be interpreted as indicating an increase of the aridity of
the overall climate. Raikes7 makes the point that in semi-arid areas the
activities of man can lead, and certainly have led, to the extension of near
desert conditions without any corresponding change in overall climate.
Archaeologists have uncovered more and more prehistoric sites in different
areas of the world and new techniques have been devised which have shown
that archaeological sites and archaeological materials can be made to yield
direct evidence of contemporary crops and herds. Since Childe’s first formu¬
lation of the concept of the “Neolithic Revolution” all these discoveries have
necessitated considerable and continuing revision of our ideas of this event.
We have already seen that the evidence now exists to date this occurrence
much earlier than Childe had originally envisaged and, as our discoveries have
increased in number, so has the geographical area grown wider in which we
believe the first steps in domestication may have taken place. It is now clear
that pottery manufacture, for example, did not necessarily go hand in hand
with domestication and that our remote ancestors originally learnt to cultivate
plants and to tame animals long before they made use of baked day pottery.
  For a long time people took Childe’s term “Neolithic Revolution” to imply
a sudden and drastic change in man’s condition and behaviour. Childe him¬
self, however, had written8 “The term does not imply a single catastrophic
change. The Industrial Revolution itself was only the culmination of a gradual
process, begun centuries earlier. The prelude to the Neolithic Revolution must
have been much longer, and it is less easy to decide what precisely should be
termed its culmination.” We now have the archaeological evidence to
support the view that earliest agricultural activities at least were often halting
and varied greatly in extent, specialization and sophistication. A few years ago
Professor Braidwood had already suggested9 such terms as “primary village
farming”, “settled village farming”, “incipient cultivation”, and “intensified
village farming” to describe the various different forms of early agricultural
activity uncovered in prehistoric excavations. It is clear beyond any doubt
that domestication was a process extending over several thousand years and
that it had its own special characteristics in different areas of the ancient
world. Domestication did not, of course, happen only once but has recurred
time and time again in different parts of the world and at different times.
Domestication as a process still continues.



      Notes

       1 Harrison, H. S. (1954). Discovery, invention and diffusion, in Singer, C.
         et al. (eds.) A History of Technology, I. London, pp. 60-2, and cp.
         Malinowski, B. (1944). A Scientific Theory of Culture. Carolina, pp. 77-93.
       2 e.g. Lartet, H. and Christy, H. (1864). Figures d’animaux gravees ou
         sculptees, Rev. Archeology 9; Mortillet, G. (1883). Le Prehistorique
                                Development of domestication studies      xxi

  Antiquite de VHomme. Paris, p. 415; see also Childe, V. G. (1952). New Light
  on the Most Ancient East. London, pp. 23, 77, 115.
3 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. (1963). The prehistory of South-western Iran: a
  preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, p. 201.
4 See Ucko, P. J. and Rosenfeld, A. (1967). Palaeolithic Cave Art. London,
  pp. 116-23,Tor the way in which these beliefs affected the acceptance of
  the real antiquity of palaeolithic art.
5 Childe, V. G. (1942). What Happened in History. London, p. 43.
6 e.g. Bonatti, E. (1966). North Mediterranean climate during the last
  Wiirm Glaciation, Nature, Lond. 209, pp. 984-5; van Zeist, W. (1967). Late
  Quaternary vegetation history of Western Iran, Rev. Palaeobot. Palyrol.,
  2, pp. 301-11.
7 Raikes, R. (1967). Water, Weather and Prehistory. London.
8 Childe, V. G. (1958). The Prehistory of European Society. London, p. 35.
9 e.g. Braidwood, R. and Braidwood, L. (1953). Earliest village com¬
  munities of South West Asia, J. World Hist., 1 (2); Braidwood, R. J.
  (1958). Near Eastern prehistory. Science, 127 (3312).
       W. F. GRIMES

       On co-operation


Basic to the whole question of the understanding of the processes by which
domestication was achieved are the mutual inter-relationships of the
disciplines which from the side of man on the one hand and of “nature” on
the other must collaborate closely if progress is to be made. It is not difficult
to define the part that each should play. It is the task of the man-aligned
disciplines to recover the material and to define its setting in terms both of
date and of culture. It is for the natural scientists to apply to that material the
methods of analysis which will enable its status to be determined.
   It will be self-evident that any discipline concerned with the study of
human development in its material and economic aspects may have a contri¬
bution to make to the understanding of domestication; but it is probably true
to say (again for obvious reasons) that archaeology is best placed at this time
to provide information of the kind required. It is perhaps worth noting here
the movement that is taking place in archaeological thought in recognising the
essential unity of the ecological approach. It is one of the most promising
features of the present scene that without in any way detracting from the value
and importance of the art-historical, typological and technological aspects
man is being viewed more and more as part of an ecosystem in which for some
millennia he has played a significant if not a dominant role. The expression,
“man another animal in the world of nature” is now coming more widely into
use, with the consequence for Britain at least that the ecological approach is
achieving for archaeology full status as a science, with the incidental benefit that
sources of research grants previously closed are now beginning to be opened.
  But this is by the way. The point that the function of the archaeologist
must lie in the recovery of evidence and the definition of its setting is em¬
phasized in the present context by the biologists’ concern about the relation¬
ship of sedentary settlement and domestication. Here it is clear that we have
much to learn, with ethnographical analogies to warn us of the danger of too
facile conclusions. The Natufians in their progression from a hunting towards
a farming economy represent a phase of relatively fixed settlement. In their
mode of life can be seen the first steps towards domestication, with the
systematic exploitation of the natural resources in plants and perhaps also in
xxiv   Introduction   grimes

animals that were available to them. The sedentary life in itself may in any
case be a variable factor, bearing in mind that the Upper Palaeolithic cave-
hunters seem to have dwelt for some time on one spot. The problem in their
case is to know to what extent depth of deposit represents continuous occupa¬
tion and how far any one site was a station on a hunting expedition, with the
accumulations reflecting successive relatively short visits rather than one long
period of fixed habitation.
  The overall results of domestication become apparent in the expansion
of populations and in the growth of external trade (both phenomena charac¬
terizing the advanced Natufians). The recognition of the detail in the
progression must depend in the first place on an awareness on the part of archae¬
ologists of the problem. It requires from them the greatest refinement of their
own techniques of investigation and observation. It calls for the realization
in co-operation with their biologist colleagues of the full potentiality of their
natural science material—and this not only in arriving at an understanding of
the nature of the changes that took place in the various species as man in¬
creased his control over them, but also in assessing their value to man himself,
and perhaps above all, their value as food. It is probably a fair guess that the
outcome of attempts to define the relationship of domestication and the
sedentary life will be to reveal an inter-locking of processes, with some
variation from one region to the next within an overall pattern.
  The foregoing comments, prompted by consideration of the Natufians,
apply far more widely and are by no means confined to matters to do with
domestication. As in so many other areas of human activity, the basic problem
is one of communication: the creation of a recognition on the part of one
group of the needs of another. Recognition is the first crucial link in the chain
of action that may bring a solution. It is probably not too much to suggest
that in the Near and Middle East an element of inconsistency continues to
operate: awareness in some places is countered in others by a situation in
which the attention given to human artifacts does not appear to be accom¬
panied by a corresponding regard for the biological evidence. Change here
cannot come too soon.
  To ask of the excavator that he should broaden his view to take account of
non-archaeological evidence is not, however, to suggest (as some archae¬
ologists seem to fear) that the excavator should be expert in the fields covered
by the biologists. The excavator should be in contact with the biologist (as
well as other scientists) so that the latter may at least be brought in when
required; better still—and this is happening with increasing frequency—
resident biologists may figure as members of excavating teams. A more
distant ideal must be the creation of a class of archaeological scientists pre¬
pared to devote their expertise to archaeological ends, capable of keeping pace
with progress in the scientific discipline whose language they understand, and
alive therefore to the mutually interacting potentialities of developments in
the different fields.
                                                         On co-operation   xxv

  It is surely in this direction that the answer must be sought. Archaeologists
have in the past frequently had cause to be grateful to scientific colleagues
who have been willing to turn aside from their normal work to pursue
objectives which must have seemed to lead them up scientific culs de sac. In
such circumstances the possibilities of development are limited. It is com¬
monly said amongst archaeologists when this subject is discussed that in
submitting “scientific” material to the expert they should be able to ask
specific questions. But granted that no one wants to devote time to the
pursuit of will-o-the-wisps, it may be doubted whether in the end this is a
fully profitable way of proceeding. The archaeologist may not ask all the
questions; the scientist, in pursuing the questions asked, may be blinded to
the other potentialities of the material. The co-operation of archaeologists
with natural scientists prepared to steep themselves in the archaeology and to
recognize the validity of archaeological evidence as having equal weight with
that of their own discipline should act powerfully in seeking answers to
questions which are relevant both to the world of man and to the world of
nature. Advocacy of such co-operation is of course no new thing and it exists
already in a growing number of places; but while mindful of past favours the
archaeologist does not come as a supplicant here. The body of knowledge
which has been built up by ever-improving methods during this century must
be taken into account by researchers in fields bordering or impinging on it.
It is unnecessary to labour this point with scientists concerned with problems
of domestication, whether of plants or of animals; yet in other contexts there
have certainly been cases, some of them very recent, of distinguished scholars
operating in such areas of overlap, who have not applied to the archaeological
evidence the close attention that they would regard as essential when dealing
with the evidence of their own disciplines.
  By way of postscript the point is worth making that the problems that
attend domestication do not end with early phases. The need remains to
follow up the ways in which man used and developed these assets, if only for
their bearing upon the difficult question of past populations. The area of co¬
operation for biologists, ethnographers and archaeologists must for this pur¬
pose be extended to take in experiment, which in replicating as far as possible
the conditions of the past might produce (amongst other things) more reliable
statistical data to exercise some control over the intelligent guesswork which
has to serve at the present time; but it would be idle to pretend that the
difficulties are not considerable. Matters that immediately present them¬
selves are ploughing techniques, field and soil formation and development,
the use of equipment and appliances of all kinds, crop yields, techniques of
harvesting and storage; and so on. In Britain growing attention is being paid
to site-investigation, which has been moving for some time beyond the field
survey stage; and much of what has been done indicates clearly the need for
experiment in controlled conditions as a way, perhaps the only way, of
xxvi   Introduction   grimes

accounting for features relating to fields and ploughing practices which are
otherwise unexplained1.
  Experimentally, Britain lags behind some European countries, Denmark in
particular. The Ancient Agriculture Committee, sponsored by the British
Association for the Advancement of Science and the Council for British
Archaeology, has, however, made a beginning with some experimentation in
ploughing techniques2 and corn storage3. The Committee is now formulating
a project for the creation of an experimental farm in which such activities
would be co-ordinated as part of a coherent whole. This experimental
approach must surely become more widely developed with time. It is the
other half, as it were, of the attack on the inter-related problems of man and
his environment, bringing benefits to the understanding of more than one
aspect of human activity. Inevitably such benefits will go more to the
humanists than to the natural scientists. It will nevertheless broaden the
basis for co-operation which the investigation of the early stages of domestica¬
tion shows already to exist.



       Notes
       1 The inspiration in all recent work may fairly be said to have come from
         Bowen, H. C. (1961). Ancient Fields. London. For a valuable summary of
         the present position in Britain see Fowler, P. J. and Evans, J. G. (1967).
         Plough-marks, Lynchets and Early Fields, Antiquity, pp. 289-301.
       2 Aberg, F. A. and Bowen, H. C. (i960). Ploughing experiments with a
         reconstructed Donnerupland Ard, Antiquity, pp. 144-7.
       3 Bowen, H. C. and Wood, P. D. (1968). Experimental storage of corn
         underground and its implications for Iron Age settlements, Inst, oj
         Archaeology Bulletin, 7, pp. 1-14.
Part i: Origins of domestication
      Section i: Environmental background




      DAVID R. HARRIS

      Agricultural systems, ecosystems and the
      origins of agriculture

Progress in the understanding of plant and animal domestication and the
evolution of agriculture depends ultimately upon the accumulation of factual
evidence from detailed taxonomic, cytological, palynological and archae¬
ological studies. But it is necessary first to consider the problem of domestica¬
tion in ecological terms. At best this approach provides a unifying conceptual
framework within which to investigate the origins of agriculture and the
evolution of all agricultural systems. At the least it provides a means of
selecting those topics and areas that call most urgentiy for detailed study and
thereby prevents the dissipation of limited time and resources on arbitrarily-
chosen investigations.
  The ecological approach requires that we conceive of agriculture as an
integral part of the environment in which it is practised. This applies equally
to techniques of cultivation and harvesting as to crops and livestock: all may
be regarded as components of given ecosystems. Thus we recognize agricul¬
tural systems, whether they are forms of primitive, palaeotechnic cultivation
or of modern, neotechnic farming, simply as distinctive types of man-
modified ecosystems.
  The methodological merit of this approach is that it provides a framework
for the analysis of agricultural systems by focusing attention on the properties
they share with all other systems, i.e. structure, function, equilibrium and
change. We are thus led to ask four fundamental questions about each
agricultural system: how is it organized ? how does it function ? what degree of
stability does it have ? and how did it evolve through time ? There have been
few attempts to answer these questions adequately for major agricultural
systems of the modern world, such as plantation agriculture, commercial
4    Part I Environmental background     HARRIS


grain farming and commercial livestock ranching, and at present there is
insufficient evidence to do so for any of the agricultural systems of the
traditional, “non-Western” world. And yet it is the study of traditional
agricultural systems, such as shifting or “swidden” cultivation, fixed-plot
horticulture, wet-padi    cultivation, nomadic     pastoralism and     forms of
mixed grain-livestock farming, that yields the most valid insights into the
origins of agriculture. In what follows the relations between agricultural
systems and natural ecosystems are explored as a prelude to deductions about
the ecological and cultural conditions most likely to give rise to domestication
and the initiation of agriculture. These inferences are put forward as an
invitation to enquiry and no attempt is made here to test them against the
available “facts”1.



       Agricultural systems and ecosystems

In the study of major natural ecosystems at a regional scale a fundamental
distinction can be made between generalized and specialized types2. The
generalized ecosystems are characterized by a great variety of plant and animal
species each of which is represented by a relatively small number of individual
organisms. Thus the diversity index of the ecosystem—or the ratio between
numbers of species and of individuals—is high. Conversely specialized
ecosystems have a low diversity index and are characterized by a small variety
of species, each of which is represented by a relatively large number of indi¬
viduals.
    In generalized terrestrial ecosystems net primary productivity, or the
increment of plant material per unit of time, tends to be high and many
ecological niches are available to species at all trophic levels in the food web,
from the primary producers (green plants) to the primary, secondary and
tertiary consumers (herbivores, carnivores and top carnivores) to the decom¬
posers (macro-organisms such as worms and woodlice and microscopic
protozoa, fungi and bacteria). The structural and functional complexity of
generalized ecosystems results in their having greater stability, or homeostasis,
than specialized ecosystems. Thus the reduction or removal of a component
species, whether by natural or human agency, tends to have less effect
because alternative pathways for energy flow are available within the system.
When alternative food sources exist for many species at each trophic level,
population levels fluctuate less widely and changes in one component are less
likely to trigger off a sequence of interactions affecting the whole ecosystem.
The tropical rain forest is the most highly generalized, productive and stable
of major terrestrial ecosystems. It has the highest diversity index, and,
although there are very few precise measurements available, net primary
productivity of above-ground plant parts reaches 10-20 grams per square
metre per day (c. 3600-7200 gm/m2/yr)3.
                                    Ecosystems and the origin of agriculture   5


  By contrast specialized natural ecosystems are much less productive and
tend also to be less stable. Among the most specialized of major terrestrial
ecosystems are the tundra, the average annual above-ground primary produc¬
tivity of which is less than 1 gm/m2/day, although during the brief growing
season it may rise to 4 gm/m2/day; the mid-latitude grasslands, whose average
annual primary productivity ranges from about 0-5 to 2 gm/m2/day; and the
boreal forest, with average annual primary productivity of up to about 2-5
gm/m2/day. There is not always an inverse relationship between the degree of
specialization of an ecosystem and its productivity—for example, desert
ecosystems are characteristically more generalized than tundra, grassland or
boreal forest ecosystems and yet their average annual primary productivity is
usually less than 0-5 gm/m2/'day—but there is nevertheless a general tendency
for primary productivity to be higher in the more generalized ecosystems.
Certainly a gradient is apparent in major forest ecosystems from the most
highly generalized and productive type, the equatorial evergreen rain forest;
through the tropical seasonal semi-evergreen and deciduous forests, where
species diversity is less and growth limited by a dry season the length and
intensity of which increases with latitude; to the more specialized and less
productive mid-latitude temperate deciduous and evergreen forests where
growth is checked by winter cold.
  It is both valid and illuminating to extend this method of analysing natural
ecosystems to the interpretation of agricultural systems. It is at once apparent
that most modern, neoteehnic agricultural systems are highly specialized;
they exist to produce maximum numbers of optimum-sized individuals of one
or two preferred plant or animal species. Some traditional, palaeotechnic
agricultural systems are similarly, if rather less highly, specialized. Wet-padi
cultivation and nomadic pastoralism are both dependent on a very limited
range of domestic crops and livestock and have evolved special techniques
for raising them and for maintaining the productivity of the system (periodic
flooding of the rice on the one hand and seasonal migration of the herds on
the other). Many traditional agricultural systems, however, are more general¬
ized. They are polycultural rather than monocultural, raising a diverse
assemblage of crops in functional interdependence and sometimes integrating
livestock into the system as both consumers and fertilizing agents. Shifting
swidden cultivation and fixed-plot horticulture are examples           of such
generalized systems still widely practised in the tropics, while in mid¬
latitudes mixed farming—involving the production on the same land of crop
combinations of grains, roots and livestock—represents a somewhat less
generalized system which has become more specialized by reaching a higher
level of technical complexity.
   From this comparison between natural ecosystems and agricultural systems
three principal ways in which the advent of cultivation changes natural
ecosystems can be deduced. The mode of change most apparent today is when
 more or less generalized natural ecosystems have been transformed into
6    Part I Environmental background     HARRIS


specialized artificial ecosystems. This involves a drastic reduction in the
diversity index following replacement of most of the wild species of the
ecosystem by a relatively small complement of cultivated plants and domestic
animals. The transformation may also lead to the selective increase of certain
wild species that thrive in the disturbed habitats associated with cultivation
and settlement, i.e. both plant and animal “weeds”, but by the build-up of
their populations at the expense of more vulnerable members of the natural
community, the specialized nature of the ecosystem is enhanced and the
diversity index remains low. The transformation of generalized natural
ecosystems into specialized agricultural systems usually leads to a loss of net
primary productivity, but this is not always so. Under modern methods of
intensive farming the trend may be reversed. The productivity of sugar cane
under intensive cultivation in Hawaii (6700 gm/m2/yr) falls within the upper
range of estimates already quoted for the tropical rain forest; and that of a
fertilized maize field in Minnesota was found to be approximately equal to
the annual net primary productivity of a nearby deciduous oak wood which
had been protected from exploitation4.
    The second mode of change—the transformation of specialized natural
ecosystems into more generalized agricultural systems—has happened only
rarely. The introduction into areas of mid-latitude grassland of a crop-
livestock-weed complex associated with a system of mixed farming, as
occurred for example during the nineteenth century on the American prairie
and the Argentinian pampas, probably resulted in an increase in diversity
index, as has the establishment of polycultural irrigation agriculture in
certain desert ecosystems in the twentieth century. But in so far as agriculture
has intruded into specialized natural ecosystems, and it is of course effectively
absent from the boreal forest and the tundra, then it has tended to do so by
replacing the natural ecosystem with monocultural cultivation, such as cereal
dry-farming or cotton irrigation, resulting in a lowering of the diversity index.
    Thirdly, the agricultural utilization of a natural ecosystem may be accom¬
plished by manipulation rather than transformation; not by drastically
changing its diversity index but by altering selected components without
fundamentally modifying its overall structure. Instead of an artificial eco¬
system being created to replace the natural one, cultivation may proceed by
substituting certain preferred domesticated species for wild species that
occupy equivalent ecological niches. Thus an assemblage of cultivated trees
and shrubs, climbers, herbs and root crops may take over spatial and func¬
tional roles essentially similar to those fulfilled by wild species of equivalent
fife-form in the natural ecosystem. Swidden cultivation and fixed-plot
horticulture manipulate the generalized ecosystems of tropical forests in this
way and in so doing come closer to simulating the structure, functional
dynamics and equilibrium of the natural ecosystem than any other agricul¬
tural systems man has devised. The substitution for equivalent wild species of
domestic animals rather than crops occurs less frequendy in manipulated
                                    Ecosystems and the origin of agriculture   7


ecosystems. Certain domesticates—notably dogs and pigs—may fulfil a role
as scavengers, but this function is normally confined to the immediate
vicinity of settlements and does not lead to replacement of the more widely-
ranging wild scavengers. The free-range management of pigs in the forests of
medieval Europe, and of cattle too in pre-Roman times, may be thought of as
an example of partial substitution of domestic for wild scavengers and
browsers, as can the brief phase in the late nineteenth century when open-
range cattle replaced bison as the dominant herbivores on the grasslands of the
North American Great Plains.
  It is this third mode of change that has the greatest relevance to the
problems of domestication and the initiation of agriculture. The transform¬
ation of a generalized natural ecosystem into a specialized artificial one
implies a long history of technical and social development prior to the
crystallization of the agricultural system. Much time must be allowed for the
far-reaching genetic and morphological changes involved in the domestication
and continued “improvement” of the relatively few highly productive crops
and domestic animals on which each specialized agricultural system depends.
Likewise the elaboration of complex stratified societies adapted to maintaining
the productivity of each system presupposes social evolution extending over
long periods of time. Manipulation of natural ecosystems by substitution of
preferred domesticates or semi-domesticates for equivalent wild species in
appropriate ecological niches is therefore likely to have occurred long before
specialized agricultural systems emerged. If so, then we may next ask which
natural ecosystems were most readily manipulated in this way ?
  There is little reason to suppose that early man manipulated specialized
natural ecosystems in the course of his earliest experiments in domestication
and cultivation. Virtually no crops and few domestic animals, save perhaps
the reindeer and the horse, appear to derive from them. Furthermore the areas
occupied by such ecosystems lack archaeological evidence of early agriculture.
It is much more probable that cultivation began by the manipulation of
generalized ecosystems where the high diversity of wild species would be
likely to encourage the use of a wide variety of plants and animals for sub¬
sistence and perhaps to stimulate experiments in their domestication. This
conclusion points to forested and wooded lands within low- and mid¬
latitudes as the most favoured areas. But, in order to determine in which
particular habitats within those areas domestication and cultivation are most
likely to have begun, it is first necessary to consider how the subsistence
economies of non- or pre-agricultural peoples related to natural ecosystems
and what their “potential” for plant and animal domestication may have been.




2—DOPAA   *   *
8    Part I Environmental background      HARRIS




        Pre-agricultural economies and ecosystems

The distinction between generalized and specialized ecosystems can be
extended to pre-agricultural subsistence economies just as it can to agricul¬
tural systems. Thus it is possible to distinguish between the specialized
hunters of prehistoric and historic times, whose subsistence depended on the
intensive exploitation of relatively few wild species, and the generalized
gatherer-hunter-fisher populations who exploited less intensively a broader
spectrum of organic resources.
    The specialized hunters characteristically occupied specialized natural
ecosystems; among those who survived into historic times were the bison- and
guanaco-hunters of the North and South American grasslands and the
caribou- and sea mammal-hunting Eskimo of the North American boreal
forest and tundra. They did so principally through large-scale co-operative
hunting of seasonally migrant herds of game. A high degree of mobility was
essential to this way of life and both material culture and social organization
became intimately adapted to the exploitation of the principal food source.
The use of wild plants for food, fibre, and other purposes represented only a
minor element in these highly specialized hunting economies. This fact,
together with the limiting effect of frequent migration, suggests that their
“potential” for plant domestication was virtually nil: a deduction that is in
accordance with the lack of archaeological evidence for early agriculture in the
specialized natural ecosystems which they occupied. Judging by the failure of
the historically surviving specialized hunters to domesticate any of the
animals they hunted—despite the apparent suitability of such herd ungulates
as the bison, the guanaco and the caribou—animal domestication, too, seems
most unlikely to have begun among such peoples; although it is often
suggested that the reindeer, and even the dog, may have been domesticated by
specialized hunters.
    With few exceptions, the generalized gatherer-hunter-fisher populations
occupied the more generalized natural ecosystems. They characteristically
formed small localized bands who knew their immediate territory intimately
and moved less far and less often than the specialized hunters. Occupying
mainly forested and wooded areas, they obtained their subsistence from a
wide variety of wild plants, non-migrating “small game” and fish. The com¬
bination of a less nomadic mode of existence and an intimate familiarity with
the plant life of a circumscribed area suggests that plant domestication is most
likely to have been initiated by such peoples. Possibly animal domestication
was too, although the evidence suggests that domestication at least of the
larger herd animals took place after agriculture had become established.
    If gatherer-hunter-fishers are the most likely progenitors of plant domesti¬
cation we may next ask which habitats offered the best opportunities within
the generalized ecosystems that they occupied. The suggested answer is the
                                    Ecosystems and the origin of agriculture    9


marginal transition zones or ecotones between major ecosystems, especially
forest- and woodland-edge situations. Biological productivity tends to be high
at both primary and secondary levels in these situations5 and they offer
maximum variation in the availability of species. They are therefore precisely
the areas likely to be chosen by generalized gatherer-hunter-fisher popula¬
tions because they provide optimum access to the most assured and variable
supply of wild plants and animals. Upland-lowland margins, varying in scale
from small intermontane valleys to the boundaries of major physiographic
provinces, may have been particularly favoured as contact zones between con¬
trasted ecosystems: their significance is borne out for example by recent work
in Iran and Mexico6. Likewise habitats at forest and woodland margins, where
tree cover gives way to more open country, are likely to have been preferen¬
tially selected. Here, at the boundaries of forest and steppe, forest and
savanna, forest and river, and forest and coast, it would have been easier than
elsewhere to combine the cropping of animal protein by hunting herbivores
or catching fish with the gathering of wild plants. The more assured and better
balanced diet thus afforded would also have reinforced tendencies towards
sedentary settlement. This in turn would have increased opportunities for the
selection of advantageous mutations through many generations of wild and
semi-domesticated plants and would thus have favoured the transition from
plant gathering to harvesting to full domestication. Furthermore, it would be
around permanently or semi-permanently occupied living sites that disturb¬
ance of the local ecosystem by man would most readily result in the creation
of the open habitats that provided optimum sites for colonization by the
weedy ancestors of later cultigens7.
   So we may hypothesize that the most favourable conditions for plant
domestication existed among those generalized gatherer-hunter-fisher popu¬
lations of forest and woodland margins who established relatively permanent
settlements based on an assured supply of animal protein (a less diffuse food
source than plant protein) and thus created disturbed, open habitats in the
vicinity of the occupied area. From what is known of non-agricultural peoples
who survived into historic times it appears that the exploitation of fish, both
fresh-water and marine, and of aquatic mammals, is likely to support a more
sedentary mode of existence than the hunting of terrestrial “small game”; and
so it may be that, in some areas at least, riparian and coastal sites have special
significance for the earliest phases of plant domestication and cultivation.



       Vegeculture and seed-culture

There is one aspect of the generalized agricultural systems of the traditional
world that has particular relevance to the origins of both plant domestication
 and agriculture: the contrast between those systems that are primarily
 dependent upon seed-reproduced crop plants (“seed-culture”) and those that
io   Part I Environmental background      HARRIS


depend mainly on vegetative reproduction (“vegeculture”). The former
appears to represent the indigenous mode of agriculture in the drier tropics
and sub-tropics of both the Old and New Worlds. Its antecedents are being
successfully probed by archaeological and biological investigations in South¬
west Asia and Middle America, although not yet in other promising areas, such
as climatically and ecologically marginal zones between upland and lowland
in West Africa, Ethiopia, South-west Arabia, the Indian sub-continent and
China. Vegeculture on the other hand has received little attention and this
omission represents a major imbalance in our present approach to the prob¬
lems of plant domestication and agricultural origins.
  Vegeculture is most highly developed as an indigenous agricultural system
in the humid tropical lowlands of America and South-east Asia. It is also
characteristic of the African tropics, but there it is based largely—although
not exclusively—on crops introduced from Asia and America. Starch-rich
cultigens with enlarged tubers, roots or rhizomes, such as yuca or manioc
(Manihot esculenta), sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), arrowroot {Mar ant a
arundinacea), lleren or allouia {Calathea allouia), yautia, ocumo or tania
{Xanthosoma sagittifolium), arracacha (Arracacia xanthorrhiza), “Kaffir potato”
{Coleus spp.), taro or eddo {Colocasia esculenta), “Fiji arrowroot” {Tacca
pinnatifida) and the yams {Dioscorea spp.), comprise the basic crops of humid
tropical vegeculture; while in the Andean highland and southward to the
extreme limit of cultivation in Chiloe Island there is a unique extension into
cool and cold temperate climates of vegeculture based on the potato (princip¬
ally Solanum tuberosum), associated at higher altitudes with three minor root
crops: oca {Oxalis tuberosa), ulluco {Ullucus tuberosus) and ahu {Tropaeolum
tuberosum).
  Ecologically the common denominator of the root crops is that, through
their ability to store starch, they are well adapted to survive long dry or cold
seasons and to mature quickly once the rams begin or the ground warms up.
Likewise their wild ancestors—of which at present we have considerable
knowledge only for the potato and the yams8—must derive from areas of
markedly seasonal climate. We may assume therefore that man’s first attempts
to select forms with larger tubers, roots and rhizomes took place in such areas.
Fig. i shows the distribution of tropical seasonal climates and it is likely that
the climatic province of the tropical lowland root crops is best represented
by the two zones with respectively from 2\ to 5 and from 5 to 7! dry months
in the year. The zone of the tropical rain forest itself, where there are fewer
than 2\ dry months, can almost certainly be excluded as a homeland of these
cultigens and at the other extreme they become ecologically more and more
out of place as the dry season lengthens beyond 7-I months in the year.
  If these climatic deductions, and the ecological arguments previously
advanced, are correct—and they are of course subject to revision in the light
of what may be learned about past climatic change in these areas—then we
should look for the origins of tropical lowland vegeculture along semi-
Fig i World distribution of tropical seasonal climates
      (re-drawn from Map 5, Seasonal Climates of the Earth, by Troll, C. and Paffen, KH., in
      Landsberg, H. E., Lippmann, EL, Paffen, KH. and Troll, C. (1963). Weltkarten zur Klimakunde.
      Heidelberg.)
12   Part I Environmental background      HARRIS


deciduous forest margins at riparian, coastal or savanna-edge sites within
climatic zones with a dry season of intermediate length. If we also take into
account what is known of the probable taxonomic relationships and areas of
origin of the cultigens themselves, the most promising areas for future
investigation emerge as: in South America, the Orinoco basin and the
coastal lowlands of Venezuela and Colombia with possible extensions into
Central America; in Africa, the Guinea coast from west of Accra to east of
Lagos together with its hinterland stretching towards the middle Niger; and
in South-east Asia, the Ganges lowland and the Indo-Chinese peninsula from
Burma to southern China. Unfortunately very little relevant archaeological
work has been done in these areas. There are many problems associated
with such work in the humid tropics, notably the high rate of decomposition
of organic materials which greatly reduces the chances of recovering
identifiable plant and animal remains. But a sheer lack of archaeological field
work in most areas is the major difficulty. Where thorough excavations have
been undertaken, as at the Niah caves in northern Sarawak, remains of bone
and shell as well as stone and pottery have been recovered and it has proved
possible to recognize cultural levels of “Neolithic” type9. Although plant
remains are much less likely to be recovered in the humid tropics, both
exceptionally dry and saturated sites are capable of yielding plant fragments.
Also, the application of pollen analysis to tropical floras may be expected to
yield new evidence on the history of tropical agriculture10, despite the fact
that many of the vegetatively reproduced crops have partially at least lost their
capacity for sexual reproduction as a result of domestication.
  Faced with such a comprehensive lack of evidence it is premature to draw
any conclusions about the antiquity of tropical vegeculture and its temporal
and spatial relations with seed-culture. One of the few positive indications of
its age comes from northern South America where Rouse and Cruxent,
working at two lowland sites—Rancho Peludo in north-western Venezuela
and Momil in northern Colombia—have shown that the pottery griddles
associated with processing the bitter manioc (budares) occur stratigraphically
below the grind-stones (metates and manos) associated with maize cultivation11.
This may indicate an old vegecultural substratum which had, according to
available radiocarbon dates, given way to maize cultivation in Colombia and
western Venezuela by about 1000 b.c. Rouse and Cruxent also suggest that the
spread of manioc cultivation can be inferred not only from the presence of
budares but also from the distribution of a distinctive type of painted pottery
(Saladoid series), which indicates that vegetative planters may have migiated
from the Venezuelan interior to the coast by way of the lower Orinoco12.
Meagre though the evidence is it accords well with the a priori ecological case
for regarding the Orinoco basin and southern Caribbean coast as a probable
hearth area of South American tropical lowland vegeculture.
  Finally, it is revealing to consider the relationship between vegeculture
and seed-culture in terms of their properties as ecosystems. In the American
                                   Ecosystems and the origin of agriculture   13


tropics the distinction between them is broadly reflected in the usage of the
terms conuco and milpa. Milpa is based on seed crops, particularly the
uniquely productive combination of maize, beans and squash, and in the past
its techniques were normally those of swidden cultivation. Conuco on the
other hand is essentially a system of root crop cultivation, often involving the
preparation of earth mounds (montones) in which stem cuttings and other
vegetative parts are planted. It may be practised as a form of swidden, but
sometimes fixed-plots are maintained for many years.
  Both systems of cultivation are polycultural. A variety of upright, climbing
and sprawling crops are grown in close association; in conucos they may be
planted together in the same mound. But there are significant differences in
the structure and equilibrium of the two systems. The diversity of plants
present tends to be greater, their stratification more complex and the canopy
of vegetation more completely closed in conuco cultivation: it represents in
other words a more highly generalized ecosystem than milpa cultivation.
Furthermore, because conuco productivity is focused upon starchy root crops
it makes smaller demands on plant nutrients than the relatively protein-rich
crops of milpa, notably maize and beans. Less fertility is therefore removed
from the soil at harvest and the system has greater inherent stability than
milpa. This is further enhanced by the fact that the opportunity for soil
erosion is minimal because the ground is seldom if ever bare of plant cover.
Provided the soil is deep enough, conucos can be cultivated successfully even
on steep slopes without inducing erosion. The milpa ecosystem on the
other hand much more easily gets out of equilibrium. The pre-eminence of
maize and other nutrient-demanding crops, the less complex stratification and
the more open canopy which increases opportunities for weed invasion, all
combine to make milpa cultivation less conservative of soil resources and more
prone to shift from one temporary clearing to another.
  The instability and expansive nature of maize-dominated milpa swidden
has been well demonstrated for the Maya lowland of Yucatan13; and historic¬
ally we should expect milpa to exhibit a much greater tendency than conuco
to expand into new areas. This may indeed be one of the principal reasons for
the predominance of seed-culture over vegeculture in the agricultural systems
of aboriginal America at the time of European discovery, related as it would
have been to the gradual ascendancy of the seed planters’ balanced vegetable
diet, based on maize and its associated crops, over the root planters’ starch-
rich vegetable diet, dependent upon a local supply of animal protein. Thus not
only was seed-culture less stable and had a greater inherent tendency to
expand, but, by providing a balanced vegetable diet, it allowed expansion to
take place into areas where litde animal protein was available. Conversely
vegeculture created a more stable ecosystem and remained tied to river-bank,
seashore, savanna-edge and other ecotone habitats with assured supplies of
animal protein. A similar historical pattern of seed-culture expanding into
areas of vegeculture is apparent in South-east Asia, where an intrusive rice
14   Part I Environmental background       HARRIS


culture has progressively replaced an indigenous vegecultural system based on
yam and taro cultivation14.
  Viewed in this ecological perspective vegeculture appears to be of funda¬
mental importance to our understanding of plant domestication and the
beginnings of agriculture. Its antiquity may well equal or even exceed that
of seed-culture and until it comes under intensive biological and archae¬
ological study we shall be unable to answer with any confidence the questions
of how, where and when agriculture originated.




      Notes
      1 A general survey of some of the factual evidence relating to agricultural
        origins in Eurasia, Africa and the Americas will be found in Harris, D. R.
        (1967). New light on plant domestication and the origins of agriculture: a
        review, Geog. Rev., 57, pp. 90-107.
      2 The theoretical concepts of ecosystem analysis are fully discussed by
        Odum, E. P. and H. T. (1959) in Fundamentals of Ecology, 2nd ed. Phila¬
        delphia, as well as more briefly in (1963). Ecology. New York, and by
        Phillipson, J. (1966). Ecological Energetics. London. There have been few
        attempts to apply ecological principles to the analysis of traditional
        agricultural systems. The most notable example is the pioneer work of
        Geertz, C. (1963). Agricultural Involution: the process of ecological change
        in Indonesia. Berkely and Los Angeles.
      3 For estimates of net primary production in a variety of ecosystems see
        Westlake, D. F. (1963). Comparisons of plant productivity, Biol. Revs.
        Camb. Phil. Soc., 38, pp. 385-425; and Billings, W. D. (1964). Plants and
        the Ecosystem. London, ch. 7.
      4 Ovington, J. D., Heitkamp, D. and Lawrence, D. B. (1963). Plant biomass
        and productivity of prairie, savanna, oakwood, and maize field ecosystems
        in central Minnesota, Ecology, 44, pp. 52-63.
      5 Ovington, J. D. (1964). Prairie, savanna and oakwood ecosystems at
        Cedar Creek, in Crisp, D. J. (ed.) Grazing in Terrestrial and Marine
        Environments. Oxford, pp. 43-53. Ovington points out that, in the
        ecosystems he studied, although primary production was highest in the
        oakwood the savanna was the most efficient ecosystem for creating the
        greatest mass of potential food for grazing animals.
      6 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The prehistory of South-western
        Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp. 147-206;
        Flannery, K. V. (1965). The ecology of early food production in Mesopo¬
        tamia, Science, 147, pp. 1247-56; Flannery, K. V., this volume, p. 73-100;
        Flannery, K. V., Kirkby, A. V. T., Kirkby, M. J. and Williams, A. W.,
        Jr. (1967). Farming systems and political growth in ancient Oaxaca,
        Science, 158, pp. 445-54.
      7 For an elaboration of the steps leading to plant domestication and a dis¬
        cussion of the role of “weedy” species in crop ancestry, see Hawkes, J. G.,
        this volume, p. 17-29.
      8 See, for example, Hawkes, J. G. (1967). The history of the potato, J. Roy.
        Hort. Soc., 92, pp. 207-24, 249-62, 288-302, and 364-5; Coursey, D. G.
        (1967). Yams. London, ch. 2.
      9 Harrison, T. (1963-4). 100,000 years of Stone Age culture in Borneo,
        J. Roy.Soc.Arts, 112, pp. 174-91.
     10 See, for example, Laeyendecker-Roosenburg, D. M. (1966). A palyno-
                             Ecosystems and the origin of agriculture   15

   logical investigation of some archaeologically interesting sections in
   north-western Surinam, Leidse Geologische Mededelingen, 38, pp. 31-6.
11 Rouse, I. and Cruxent, J. M. (1963). Venezuelan Archaeology. New Haven
   and London, pp. 5-6 and 53-4.
12 Rouse, I. and Cruxent, J. M. (1963). op. cit. pp. 111-25.
13 Cowgill, U. M. (1962). An agricultural study of the southern Maya low¬
   lands, Amer. Anthrop., 64, pp. 273-86.
14 Spencer, J. E. (1966). Shifting cultivation in Southeastern Asia, Univ.
   California Publications in Geog., 19, pp. 110-22.
      J. G. HAWKES

       The ecological background of platit domestication


      Introduction

It is a truism of science to say that one cannot solve a problem unless one asks
the right sort of questions; and to ask the right questions it is necessary to
look at the problem from a particular viewpoint. That viewpoint, so far as the
origin of domesticated plants is concerned, is, I am convinced, the ecological
one. I shall hope to show that we must look at wild and cultivated plants
associated with man as an ecological complex and view this in relation to the
ecology of man himself. If we do this we can make considerable progress hi
understanding the mechanism of domestication, verifying and, when neces¬
sary, modifying our hypotheses by reference to exact archaeobotanical data.
  It seems fairly certain to us now that domestication of plants and animals
started independently in several places at different times, as Helbaek1 has
pointed out. Evidently only certain groups of wild plants were involved in
domestication, and Harlan and de Wet2 show that certain families of plants,
especially the Gramineae (grasses) and Leguminosae (beans, peas, etc.) have
contributed many major crops; others, such as Cyperaceae, Ranunculaceae,
Cactaceae, Caryophyllaceae, Portulacaceae, Berberidaceae, Papaveraceae,
Saxifragaceae,   Geraniaceae,    Onagraceae,    Apocynaceae,    Asclepiadaceae,
Plantaginaceae and many others, have produced no important crops at all.
  Then again crops have originated in certain parts of the world only, as was
first pointed out by de Candolle3 who stated: “Agriculture came originally, at
least so far as the principal species are concerned, from three great regions, in
which certain plants grew, regions which had no communication with each
other. These are—China, the south-west of Asia (with Egypt), and inter-
tropical America.” At a later date Vavilov4 considerably enlarged on this
point by showing that all the major crops originated in the tropical to sub¬
tropical regions of the world, and in some eleven or twelve centres of origin,
based on his concept that centres of diversity could be equated with centres of
origin. Although he added further that the origins of plant domestication were
to be found in mountain zones in these centres modern research gives some
indication that this was probably an over-simplification. We shall return to
18     Part I Environmental background     hawkes


this point later, but for the moment we can establish quite clearly that culti¬
vated plants arose from a rather restricted number of plant families and in a
rather restricted area of the globe. This does not imply, however, that man did
not utilize all kinds of plants in every area in which he lived. Quite the
contrary. All archaeological and ethnobotanical evidence shows clearly that
both primitive and relatively advanced peoples have gathered and eaten or
otherwise utilized all manner of wild plant products from time immemorial.
Even today, we still gather plants, though much less so in our highly in¬
dustrial urbanized life than was so a hundred years ago5. However, the
majority of wild plants gathered by mankind have remained firmly wild and
have never been domesticated.
     Yet some plants, with apparently no more edible or nutritious seeds, fruits
or other storage organs than these permanently wild ones were domesticated,
and in certain regions of the world only. There must have been, then, in the
ancestors of these domesticated plants some special attribute which induced
their cultivation. Alternatively, one might postulate that there was some
attribute of the peoples of those regions which promoted the invention of
agriculture there and nowhere else, but I shall try to develop the thesis that
we can look for the basic causes in the plants themselves. Alternative “deter¬
ministic” hypotheses which seek to explain the origins of agriculture by
postulating a certain stage of mental or sociological development in the
peoples concerned or by progressive desiccation of the regions where they
lived have not received much support latterly. They will be left to one side for
the present though in the end we shall need to return to them, even if in a
modified form.



         The ancestors of cultivated plants

To arrive at some idea of the attributes of the ancestors of cultivated plants we
must look at their closest wild relatives. We clearly cannot study the direct
ancestors but only the so-called “ancestral species” which have continued to
exist and develop in parallel with the cultivated plants, assuming that these
ancestral species have retained many features from the period when domesti¬
cation took place.
     The common factor in cultivated and in closely related wild species is their
“weedy tendency”, their ecological adaptation to “open”, disturbed, or un¬
stable habitats with bare soil and less competition from other plants. This
makes use of an ecological, rather than a horticultural definition of weeds, as
Bunting6 and Harlan and de Wet7 have pointed out, and defines a weed, not in
terms of whether it is an unwanted plant competing with those we are trying
to cultivate, but one which is adapted to disturbed or open habitats, often
requiring high soil nitrogen and able to grow only in those areas where climax
forest and grassland have been destroyed.
                           The ecological background of plant domestication    19

  In a sense, there is very little basic difference between cultivated plant and
weed, except that weeds are “unwanted” and cultivated plants are “wanted”;
both weeds and crops have the same weedy tendencies, the same ecological
adaptation. Weeds, also, may seem to be more agressive than cultivated plants
but this is not true in every case, and in primitive agricultural systems it is
difficult often to distinguish between weed and crop.
  If then the growth and habitat requirements of the cultivated plants and
their present-day closely related wild relatives are similar, we can safe’y
assume that the original ancestor of the cultivated plant will have possessed
similar ecological characteristics. Vavilov8 was convinced that “the wild
species and varieties most akin to the cultivated plants, form one ecological
group with the latter” and cites as examples barley, wheat, oats, lentils, melon,
carrot and hemp, all of which possess wild relatives of similar ecological
requirements.
  How then did the ancestors of our cultivated plants survive in pre-human
or pre-agricultural times, given that they were unable to grow in dense plant
communities of perennial trees, shrubs or herbs ? Evidently they were re¬
stricted to disturbed soil along river banks, on gravel, rocks, screes, landslide
areas and places where the poor and intermittent rainfall was insufficient to
support a vegetation of a perennial nature (scrub deserts, dry intermont
basins, for instance). Plants with weedy tendencies may well have evolved in
or near the great glaciers which covered vast areas of the northern hemisphere
after and during the great Pleistocene glaciations. Other disturbed habitats
are provided by the results of overgrazing of herbivores, traffic on game trails,
animal trampling and bedding areas, the work of burrowing animals, etc.9
Clearly there were plenty of disturbed or open areas before the advent of man
and he himself only enlarged and multiplied such areas, thus providing many
more opportunities for plants with weedy tendencies to spread and increase in
numbers. Even before the invention of agriculture, as Sauer10 and others have
suggested, man may have acted as an agent for ecological change by burning
vegetation and clearing or trampling it near his camps and trails.
  To go back to a point that was made earlier, man has always apparently
been a food gatherer (apart from a hunter) and no doubt he gathered weed
seeds along with the rest. Yet, curiously enough, some groups of weeds have
never become domesticated whilst other plants most obviously were domesti¬
cated because of their ecological weediness. Thus, Englebrecht11 put forward
the view that certain primary crops offered themselves to the earliest collecting
peoples by growing near their temporary settlements as “habitation weeds”,
favoured by the high nutritive status of the soil. Such plants sought man out as
much as he sought them out, because of their specific manurial requirements.
  For example, Sinskaja12 from a study of hemp (Cannabis sativa) showed
that weed hemp, just as cultivated hemp, required a very richly fertilized soil
and that it was always to be found around the camps of the nomads in the
Altai where the soil had been enriched by cattle during the winter, as well as
20   Part I Environmental background      HAWKES


in kitchen gardens and in rubbish heaps. She drew attention to the wide varia¬
tion of wild hemp, which followed man’s wanderings through the Old World,
postulating that in times of famine man selected for use the forms with less
shattering fruits and higher oil content. Sinskaja pointed out that in the Altai,
one could see all the details of hemp cultivation and she postulated that the
following four stages, which can now be seen simultaneously, followed each
other chronologically when hemp was first cultivated, (i) The plant occurred
only in the wild. (2) It spread from its original wild centres to populated
places. (3) Hemp then began to be utilized by the population. (4) It was finally
cultivated.
   Vavilov13 sums up by stressing that the primitive ancestral forms of culti¬
vated plants already possessed tendencies which induced man to cultivate
them, that man took what was offered to him and that for many plants the
process of their introduction into cultivation took place almost independently
of his will.
   This has sometimes been called the “rubbish heap” hypothesis of the
origin of agriculture since it assumes that plants with weedy tendencies
colonized kitchen middens and rubbish heaps and were thus gathered by
primitive man and, imperceptibly perhaps, brought into cultivation14. It
does not, however, explain the exact processes of cultivation or throw light on
the following points: (a) Why were plants domesticated only comparatively
recently, some 9000 years ago, and thus for only 0-5% of the total 2 million
years of man’s developmental history? (b) Why were only certain plants
cultivated originally from the very wide range of gathered plants and the
fairly wide range of plants with weedy tendencies ? (c) Why were the origins
of agriculture restricted to certain areas of the world, even though weeds
seem to be fairly widespread and especially abundant in the northern temperate
belts where agriculture did not, in fact, originate ?
   These questions are not easy to answer, but I think it would be helpful to
consider the following points:
   (i) Recent thinking has rightly placed emphasis on the role of weeds in the
evolution of cultivated plants subsequent to their domestication as well as in
the origin of agriculture by the colonization of rubbish heaps. Perhaps, how¬
ever, we have been a little too enthusiastic about weeds from the ecological
point of view and should look again at the whole situation rather more
critically.
   (ii) The ancient primary crops such as wheat, barley, maize, etc., originated
in mountains and for the first two species the direct descendants of their
ancestors are still alive and available for study. We can therefore look more
closely at these species rather than at all weeds, with a view to solving the
problem of agricultural origins.
   (iii) The closely related wild relatives of these cereal species grow as weeds
of fields and cultivated land, whilst other species in the same genus are not
found in such habitats but in compact soils on dry slopes.
                           The ecological background of plant domestication   21



      Origins of seed agriculture

How did the ancestors of the cultivated cereals survive in pre-agricultural
times ? To avoid competition with other plants it is evident that they could
only grow and survive in poor thin soil on rocks, amongst stones or in sands
and gravels, as we have already stated. Furthermore, it seems necessary for
them to have been confined to regions with a well-marked wet and dry season,
since if the rainfall was continuous such areas would quickly become covered
by lush rain forest or dense grasses.
  These plants, ancestors of our cultivated plants, were opportunists; they
needed to germinate and grow quickly when the rains came in the spring and
when the ground warmed up, but equally, they needed to complete a full life
cycle and mature their seeds before the ground dried out in the summer.
Thereafter the seeds lay dormant in the soil, germinating perhaps a little in
the autumn rains, and growing again in the spring to set a new crop of seeds
in the early summer. At the same time they were extremely sensitive to
competition from other vegetation and for this reason were restricted to areas
such as I have just described.
  It is interesting to note that most of the ancient Old World seed crops were
domesticated in the mountains of the subtropics from about 250 to 45°N
where these climatic conditions, with a cold winter, wet spring and
autumn and a hot dry summer are to be found. The seeds needed to survive
the long hot dry season in a well-baked thin soil, and there must consequently
have been a strong selection pressure for large seeds with large food reserves
to resist the drying out and grow quickly when the rains came again. In these
soils and under these conditions nothing with small seeds would survive well,
but nor would large perennial plants either, so these ecological weeds, the
ancestors of our cultivated plants, were able to grow and survive under
these special conditions without competition from trees or herbaceous
perennials.
  Such plants, as we have already stated, were pre-adapted for cultivation,
and with their weedy tendencies, their need for “open” rich soil conditions,
naturally colonized the bare ground and rubbish heaps provided by man.
Since they had already evolved large food reserves they were of particular
interest to man, who no doubt ate them in preference to the smaller-seeded
weeds and wild plants when he could find them. We thus have the two
attributes here: (1) “weediness”, and (2) large food reserves which enabled
them to survive in very dry summer conditions in poor thin soil free from
competition with perennial plants. These two factors together seem to me to
be the key to the domestication of Old World mountain seed crops.
  To primitive man it must have seemed little short of miraculous to find
that plants needed for food sprang up by his very huts and paths. Perhaps it is
not too far-fetched to suggest that this situation might have been the basis for
22     Part I Environmental background     hawkes


so many folk-legends which attributed the beginnings of agriculture and the
introduction of useful plants to gods or supernatural beings15.
     I suggest, therefore, that seed agriculture was developed in three distinct
stages:


        1 Gathering and colonization


In this first stage the pre-adapted wild plant species with weedy tendencies
which were ecologically adjusted to growth in areas with well-marked wet and
dry seasons and which possessed rather larger food reserves than normal
began to colonize areas around dwelling places and were gathered from here
and elsewhere by man, still at the food gathering stage.
     All evidence points to the fact that primitive peoples were extremely untidy,
so that no doubt seeds were dropped by mistake round their dwellings after
they had gathered them from afar. As the plants established themselves the
collecting range was diminished and man’s collecting and foraging began to
be confined more and more to the vicinity of his dwellings where, in the richer
nitrogenous soil, the weedy plants established themselves readily. Thus
gathering changed imperceptibly into harvesting but as yet there was no
planting. In this way a kind of symbiosis resulted from the ecological require¬
ments of the plants on the one hand and the food needs of man on the other.


        2 Harvesting


This is the second stage, where a build-up of mutations conduced towards
more efficient harvesting by the selection of cereals with non-brittle rhachis
and in the selection of poor or defective capsule dehiscence in flax, peas,
beans and other plants. Thus, unconscious selection by man of the plants with
less efficient dispersal methods took place since it was the seeds of these that
were automatically more efficiently gathered. Such plants would have been at
a disadvantage in the wild, and indeed cereals such as maize lack all methods
of natural dispersal and depend entirely on man.


        3 Sowing {planting)


As a third and final stage sowing as well as harvesting must have taken place.
This is an active process which involves the careful retention of seeds and the
concept of placing them in the more or less prepared soil of fields or gardens
round the dwellings. Probably this came very late when already a high level of
social and cultural organization in the primitive “agriculturalists” had been
attained. Prior to this stage one could visualize that although seeds from
non-brittle cereals and non-dehiscent capsules might have been gathered for
consumption only the wild type forms with brittle spikes or dehiscent capsules
actually formed the basis of next year’s crop, since the others were wholly
                           The ecological background of plant domestication      23


eaten. At that stage, then, there must have been strong selection pressure
against the non-brittle rhachis. Not until some of the harvested seeds were
kept for active sowing did the selection pressure change in favour of non-
brittle spikes and only at that point could the crop be considered to be truly
domesticated.



      Origin of root and tuber agriculture

We have been speaking consistently about plants that reproduce from seeds
and have neglected all mention of those that reproduce vegetatively. It has
been postulated at various times that agriculture based on roots and tubers
preceded that based on seeds and fruits, since in the former case the opera¬
tions of planting and harvesting are almost identical, whilst in the latter these
processes are very dissimilar. This sounds on the face of it to be a reasonable
and logical hypothesis, but there is no concrete evidence to support it so far as
I am aware. It would seem more likely that seed agriculture developed in
those areas where suitable seed plants were available and where the ecological
conditions for it were suitable, mainly, as we have seen, in the northern sub¬
tropical mountain belt of the Old World and in the northern tropical belt of the
New World, as Sauer16 has pointed out. Root and tuber agriculture seems to
have developed chiefly in the tropics, though one cannot make too rigid a
distinction between the two, and there are many regions where seed and tuber
agriculture go on side by side.
  Tropical root crops must have originated also in areas with a well-marked
wet and dry season, since the plant stores up in its underground organs
sufficient food reserves to tide it over the dry period. Large food reserves are a
distinct advantage to a plant in a tropical environment which needs to grow
extremely quickly when the rains begin in order to compete with trees and
shrubs; small seeded cereals, on the other hand, would grow more slowly, and
it is therefore quite likely, as Sauer and others have pointed out, that agricul¬
ture in the tropics was based primitively on root and tuber cultures, develop¬
ing in or on the edges of the dry forest zones, probably at low altitudes.
Harris17 considers that the marginal contact zones between major ecosystems
(ecotones) may have great significance for the beginning of vegeculture. It
seems that the detailed processes may well have been similar to those I have
already described for seed cultures, with the three phases of (1) Gathering
and colonization, (2) Harvesting, and (3) Planting following in chronological
succession.
  Sauer has correctly pointed out the enormous emphasis placed on root and
tuber agriculture in the New World, as compared with the Old. Not only is
there an abundance of tropical tubers (yams, canna, manihot, sweet potatoes,
etc.) but we find also a wide range of high mountain cool temperate tuber
crops (potatoes, oca, ulluco, arracacha, ahu, etc.). This is all the more surprising
 24   Part I Environmental background     HAWKES


 when we consider that they may have arisen in competition with maize.
 However, recent discoveries on maize domestication have shown that it may
 have been first domesticated in Meso-America, and only later spread south¬
 wards to the area of the Andean root and tuber crops. Secondly, these latter
 are cultivated in general at altitudes higher and cooler than are suitable for
 really efficient maize cultivation and they do not therefore compete with it as
 much as might be supposed at first glance.
   We can postulate the same three stages for the high altitude root and tuber
 crop domestication as before; my own researches on the potato have shown
 that in one or two places relics of stage two still exist (in Venezuela and
 Colombia) where plants are harvested from year to year but are never planted
 or arc only re-planted when the soil becomes so depleted that the yields drop
too low to make it worth continuing to grow the plants in the same place. It is
of interest to note further that the one example of continuous harvesting with
no planting that I was able to discover was in a kitchen garden near a house,
where the soil was continually enriched by household rubbish and the excreta
of household animals. This situation seems to me to be a relic (or at least a
model) of the early stage two (Harvesting) of agriculture, described above.
   Stage one (Colonization and gathering) can be seen very frequently, since
wild as well as weed potato species are constantly colonizing areas around
fields and settlements. Many of these are eaten if there is a crop failure, and
would no doubt be cultivated if their yield and flavour were better; in fact one
can go further and state that the really good plants have already been domesti¬
cated whilst the poor or mediocre ones still seem to be presenting themselves
for domestication, in the same way as the ancestors of the better sorts which
were successfully domesticated many thousands of years ago.
  An interesting point that might be worth examining here and which Dr.
Harris has kindly brought to my attention is whether there are likely to be
significant differences in the rate of evolution of root and tuber crops as com¬
pared with seed crops. The former reproduce vegetatively and do not there¬
fore benefit from the effects of sexual reproduction which brings with it
genetic segregation and a potentially greater rate of change. We must re¬
member that most primitive tuber crops are capable of sexual reproduction
and seedlings arise spontaneously, whose tubers will be incorporated in the
crop. On the other hand, the advanced Old World cereals are self-fertilizing
and an exchange of genes is not then possible between individuals. This would
slow down the rate of change. Maize, however, is a cross-fertilizing seed crop
and most certainly exhibits an enormous amount of variation. On the whole, I
doubt whether any conclusions can be drawn on the length of domestication of
vegetatively versus sexually reproducing crops from this line of enquiry.
                          The ecological background of plant domestication    25




      Primary and secondary crops

Vavilov18 has shown that a number of domesticated plants were not cultivated
directly from the wild but arose in a rather different manner at a later stage as
weeds of cultivation. He thus divides cultivated plants into two distinct groups
of crops.
  1 Primary crops, comprising all those ancient crops that, so far as we know,
were domesticated directly from wild plants (even though the wild plants
possessed strong weedy tendencies). Examples of this group are wheat, barley,
rice, soyabean, flax and cotton. To those we could also add maize and
potatoes.
  2 Secondary crops, which originated as weeds in admixture with the
primary crops, and generally at a much later stage. Examples of these are rye,
oats, Eruca sativa and a number of other minor crops. These became adjusted
to growth in various primary crops (e.g. rye in soft and club wheats and oats in
emmer—Triticum dicoccum) and mimicked them in a number of physiological
and morphological characters through the effect of unconscious artificial
selection.
  As the principal crops were taken into areas further north or at higher
altitudes they were less well-adapted to the harsher climatic conditions and
poorer soils; the weeds on the other hand, were better adapted to such con¬
ditions and hence the percentage of weeds increased until finally the weed
became the crop and the crop the weed. This hypothesis had also been
advanced by Englebrecht19 though it was not documented as fully by him as
by Vavilov.
  In a rather different way the tomato can also be thought of as a secondary
crop since it apparently spread northwards from Peru through the New
World tropics to Mexico as a weed of maize and bean fields. It was actually
brought into cultivation in Mexico, though it may have persisted as a garden
weed for a very long time.
   Important crops such as oats and rye thus originated as weeds, just as, in a
sense, the primary crops such as wheat and barley originated because of their
weedy tendencies. In addition, most of our crops in their centres of diversity,
and even outside, are associated with very closely associated weed species,
some so close that they are often though t of merely as weed forms of the same
species. These weeds, as Harlan20 rightly points out, represent rapidly evolv¬
ing races which are able to exchange genes with the crop through occasional
bursts of hybridization21. They act as reservoirs of variability and are of the
greatest importance in the evolution of the crop itself. They are thus of great
importance to the plant breeder in his search for valuable genetic variation,
and Vavilov in his use of weed forms for breeding set a pattern which many
other breeders have followed.
26   Part I Environmental background      hawkes




      Mountains as the home of agriculture

Vavilov22 counters the views of Metchnikov that cultivated plants originated
first in the great river basins of the Nile, Ganges, Euphrates, etc., by stating
that the entire racial diversity of the field and vegetable crops studied by him
is concentrated in mountainous districts. It is well known now that agriculture
in these large river valleys had already reached a high level of sophistication,
depending for success on meteorological prognostication and a knowledge of
geometry and surveying so as to predict the time of water flow and to conduct
the water through a proper system of irrigation channels. Vavilov further
points out that mountains supply optimum conditions for differentiation of
races and varieties, for the preservation of diverse ecotypes and for manifest¬
ing varietal diversity. He points also to the fact that mountains are excellent
isolators, providing a wide range of different conditions, isolated valleys and
all the essential prerequisites for rapid evolution, both in wild and in culti¬
vated plants. He also emphasizes the importance of the varied ethnic composi¬
tion of the mountain inhabitants of S.W. Asia, the Caucasus and N.W. India,
contrasting that with the poor ethnic diversity of the peoples of the Alps and
Pyrenees, which he thinks might explain the absence of variation in the
cultivated plants of those latter areas. Helbaek23 concurs with Vavilov in
considering that the natural habitats of the primary crops of S.W. Asia,
wheat, barley, flax, etc., are the mountains, where adequate rainfall for non¬
irrigation agriculture exists. On the other hand, the basins of the Nile and
Euphrates-Tigris do not answer to these requirements; furthermore, it can¬
not be demonstrated that the wild progenitors of the plants mentioned ever
existed in these valleys.



      The tropical lowlands as the home of agriculture

Because of this well substantiated thesis that the mountains of south-western
Asia, the Caucasus and parts of the Himalayas were the cradles of agriculture
for many crops we have hitherto assumed that all agriculture began in
mountains, believing as we do that it arose more than once and was based on a
wide variety of different plants. It is certainly thought that the cool-temperate
root and tuber crops of the Andes were first domesticated in the mountains
and that maize also was cultivated primarily in rather dry medium altitude
valleys of Meso-America. However, it seems doubtful whether we can
extrapolate the hypothesis to include tropical root and tuber crops or
tropical grain crops24. We should do better to consider that their origins lay in
the lowland tropical belt, in areas of intermittent rainfall with a well-marked
dry season and probably on the forest-savanna margins or in low stony hills
where the soil cover was poor. Here again, competition with climax forest or
                          The ecological background of plant domestication   27


grassland would be considerably reduced, as we saw for the subtropical
mountain seed crops. By examining a map of the wet/dry belts in tropical
latitudes we could, I think, limit our search for the regions of origin of many
wide-spread tropical crops. Added to this we should consider the distribution
areas of the nearest wild relatives as de Candolle25 did, so as to clarify and
define more exactly the areas in which the cultivated plants were first domesti¬
cated.



         Prerequisites for agriculture in human societies

In embarking on this subject as a botanist, I realize that I am treading on
extremely thin ice. Yet one or two points might be worth making, if for no
other reason than to promote discussion.
  Many social anthropologists have made the point that agriculture cannot
originate until man takes up a sedentary life, presumably engaged in fishing
or restricted by the terrain of mountains from roaming for great distances.
Since few cultivated plants and certainly none of the primary crops are
derived from maritime plants it can therefore be assumed that the fishing was
carried out in fresh-water rivers or lakes. This must surely apply to lowland
tropical crop origins since one would hardly assume that there were sufficient
fish in small mountain streams for the upland pre-agriculturalists to make use
of them.
  A second point often made is that the incentive to cultivate the land was
from surplus and not from hunger. I have attempted to show that there was
no incentive involved in the three stages of agriculture as I have set them out,
but that the process, once started, was practically automatic. Good plants
appeared, as if by magic or as a gift from the gods, and gathering changed
imperceptibly into harvesting and thence into planting.
  Nevertheless a large unsolved problem still exists, which I mentioned
before but which I have not attempted to solve. Why in fact did it take man so
long to become an agriculturalist, some 99-5% of his total period on earth as a
distinct species ? Fossil evidence, such as the wild maize pollen from peat
below the City of Mexico with a radiocarbon dating of 80,000 years, shows
that the plants were available long before their domestication took place. The
problem is thus taken out of the botanist’s sphere and handed firmly back to
the ethnologist and social anthropologist. It seems that one may need to bring
in concepts of the correct stage of sociological or tool-making development in
order to explain this, and since we have already stated that agriculture needed
a settled mode of existence before it could begin we must assume that man
did not develop such a settled mode of existence until some 9000 years ago,
and then only in certain places. When this stage in human development was
reached agriculture could then begin, if the right plants were also available.
28     Part I Environmental background      hawkes




        Conclusions

In this paper I have tried to show the importance of an ecological approach in
solving problems of domestication, building on the work of Vavilov and
others, and putting forward a number of points of my own for discussion.
     Cultivated plants and their ancestors are, from one point of view, nature’s
misfits. They cannot form a part of climax vegetation but must needs take
advantage of disturbed open soils or rocky areas of such poor soil quality that
nothing without the tenacious powers of quick growth and ability to store large
quantities of food could survive. Not all plants with weedy tendencies could
have been cultivated but it seems certain now that without weedy tendencies
no plant could have been cultivated primitively, nor could it have come in at a
later stage as a secondary crop. Once the main food crops had been domesti¬
cated many other lesser crops, garden plants, flowers and trees were brought
into cultivation. With these, no doubt the basic pre-requisites were quite
different, and I should go beyond my brief to discuss them here. We have
been interested in trying to solve the problem of how agriculture first arose,
for the agricultural revolution has undoubtedly been, together with the use of
tools and the discovery of fire, one of the most important phenomena in the
history of mankind.




        Notes
        1 Helbaek, H. (1959). How farming began in the Old World, Archaeology,
          22, pp. 183-9.
        2 Harlan, J. R. and de Wet, J. M. J. (1965). Some thoughts about weeds,
          Econ. Bot., 19, pp. 16-24.
        3 de Candolle, A. (1855). Geographie Botanique Raisonee. Paris; de Candolle,
          A. (1882). Origin of Cultivated Plants. English trans. London, published
          1884.
        4 Vavilov, N. I. (1926). Studies on the origins of cultivated plants, Bull.
          Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed., 16, pp. 1-245.
        5 See Schwanitz, F. (1966). The Origin of Cultivated Plants. (Trans, from
          German edition of 1957.) Cambridge, Mass.
        6 Bunting, A. H. (i960). Some reflections on the ecology of weeds, in
          Harper, J. L. (ed.) The Biology of Weeds. Oxford.
        7 Harlan, J. R. and de Wet, J. M. J. (1965). ibid.
        8 Vavilov, N. I. (1926). ibid.
        9 Harlan, J. R. and de Wet, J. M. J. (1965). ibid.
       10 Sauer, C. O. (1952). Agricultural Origins and Dispersals. New York.
       11 Engelbrecht, T. (1916). Uber die Entstehung einiger feldmassig ange-
          bauter Kulturpflanzen, Geogr. Z, 22, pp. 328-34; quoted by Darlington,
          C. D. (1963). Chromosome Botany and the Origins of Cultivated Plants.
          (2nd ed.) London.
       12 Sinskaja, E. N. (1925). Field crops of Altai, Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.,
          14, pp. 367-70; quoted by Vavilov, N. I. (1926). ibid.
       13 Vavilov, N. I. (1926). ibid.
                      The ecological background of plant domestication       29


14 See Sauer, C. O. (1952). ibid.; See Anderson, E. (1954). Plants, Man and
   Life. London.
15 Thus, de Candolle, A. (1882). op. cit. p. 1, states: “The traditions of
   ancient peoples, embellished by poets, have commonly attributed the first
   steps in agriculture and the introduction of useful plants, to some divinity,
   or at least to some great emperor or Inca.” See also Darlington, C. D.
   (1963). op. cit. p. 133.
16 Sauer, C. O. (1952). ibid.
17 Harris, D. R., this volume, pp. 3-15.
18 Vavilov, N. I. (1926). ibid.
19 Engelbrecht, T. (1916). ibid.
20 Harlan, J. R. (1965). The possible role of weed races in the evolution of
   cultivated plants, Euphytica, 14, pp. 173-6.
21 See also Hutchinson, Sir J. (ed.) (1965). Essays on Crop Plant Evolution.
   Sect. 7, Crop plant evolution: a general discussion. Cambridge.
22 Vavilov, N. I. (1926). ibid.
23 Helbaek, H. (i960). Ecological effects of irrigation in ancient Mesopotamia
   Iraq, 22, pp. 186-96.
24 See, for example, Harris, D. R. (1967). New light on plant domestication
   and the origins of agriculture: a review, Geog. Rev., 57, pp. 90-107.
25 de Candolle, A. (1855). ibid.
      C. VITA-FINZI

      Geological opportunism


We do not know how, or to what extent, primitive man responded to climate;
we shy away from thinking that any such response was decisive. Yet geologists,
palynologists and their colleagues continue to devote their energies to
expressing their findings in climatic terms for the benefit of the archaeologist.
And this even when their client is becoming increasingly convinced that
climatic change does not appear to account for “significant subsistence shifts
. . . in the archaeological record”1 and that human populations at the hunting
gathering stage, in that they do not a priori five at starvation level2, are not
vulnerable to climatic blackmail.
   An unfortunate corollary of this climate-oriented approach (which,
incidentally, pervades most studies concerned with the Pleistocene) is that
workers in diverse fields try to employ climatic terms as their lingua franca
even when the climatic implications of their findings are not necessarily
comparable or related. Consider, for example, a situation where the pollen
spectrum within a sediment has been grossly distorted (the use of this term
is not meant to imply that an ideal, undistorted spectrum necessarily exists)
by anomalous winds blowing from a highland during a particular season,
whereas the sediment that harbours the pollen has been laid down by an
isolated downpour falling in a lowland area. The reduction of both sets of
data to climatic terminology is unlikely to reveal how they are associated. The
theme of the present paper is that, at least as regards the study of plant and
animal domestication and the history of agriculture, some of the indicators
that are defective in the reconstruction of ancient climates may directly
furnish us with information on past conditions which is as relevant as climate
to the issues at stake and sometimes more so.
   To pursue a little further the hypothetical illustration given above, the fact
that deposition was accomplished by flood-flow may in itself be of primary
significance. Two cases where this proves to have been the case at a time
which might be deemed “sensitive” in terms of early agriculture will be
mentioned in the hope that other workers may be encouraged to consider the
primary implications of geological (and analogous) evidence while shelving
its secondary, climatic connotations.
32     Part I Environmental background    vita-finzi

     The first example is that of the Tesuque Valley in New Mexico, which
displays two alluvial terraces. The older of the two, which stands 18-20 feet
above the stream, has yielded a radiocarbon date of 2230 ± 250 years from
a sample found at a depth of 13 feet; pottery found on its surface suggests
that deposition had ended by a.d. 1200-1250. Miller and Wendorf state:
“While deposition of the high-terrace alluvium was occurring, the floodplain
of Rio Tesuque would have been an excellent area for the practice of flood-
water farming (Bryan 1929)3. The numerous villages located by the archae-
ologic survey indicate that the valley supported a large population during this
period. Later, when the high terrace was trenched by erosion, the area suitable
for floodwater farming was greatly reduced4.”
     The second example is that of the upper Wadi Hasa in Jordan5. Near
Qal’at el Hasa the floor of this valley is underlain by an alluvial deposit (the
Hasa Formation) which has a maximum thickness of 5 m. and which has
yielded Kebaran artifacts and, one metre below its surface, charcoal dated to
3960 b.p. As pre-Kebaran upper palaeolithic remains, though present in an
older fill nearby, appear to be absent from the Hasa Formation, its deposition
may be placed somewhere between 10,000 and 2000 years ago, with the bulk
of it laid down by 4000 b.p. The character of the fill—a well-bedded silty fine
sand—suggests deposition by periodic flooding. This leads to a conclusion
similar to that reached by Miller and Wendorf with regard to the Tesuque
high terrace, namely that “for a period of several millennia Wadi Hasa was
endowed with broad, undissected valley floors, subject to periodic silt
deposition by floods, conditions reminiscent of those exploited by the Navahos
in New Mexico (Bryan, 1954:16)”6. The repeated reference to Bryan deserves
some comment.
     To judge from Bryan’s illustrations, the chief prerequisite for floodwater
farming is an undissected alluvial floor, since diversion is the means by which
the floodwaters are exploited. In the instances he gives, drinking water could
be obtained from surface depressions and from an easily tapped high water-
table; the valley vegetation furnished fuel and timber. Continuing aggrada¬
tion was significant only in so far as the cultivable area was thereby
progressively increased, but the renewal of fertility by silt deposition, which
we have come to associate with Nilotic flood cultivation, apparently played
no significant part in the exploitation of Chaco Canyon.
     Now it is true that aggradation would here seem to have been occasioned
by a moister climatic interlude; yet the hazards of drought remained although,
as today, their role was simply to “limit the number of people and fix their
standards of living”7. In other words the climatic factor is relevant in this
context only in that it inhibited erosion; it was the non-degrading situation
which, in Bryan’s words, “afforded a locality for the initiation and develop¬
ment of a civilization based on agriculture”8, or as one might say in today’s
more moderate parlance, provided “lands of high water-retention, where soil
moisture helped the planted cereals to survive annual fluctuations in rain-
                                                      Geological opportunism    33


fall”9. This kind of situation can be detected in the stratigraphic record with¬
out the need to opt for any of the theories advanced to explain the alternation
between erosion and deposition in semi-arid environments; yet it tends to be
eclipsed by the search for causes.
  The geological opportunism exhibited by the inhabitants of Chaco Canyon,
and possibly by those of the Tesuque Valley and Wadi Hasa, evidently
changes in scope as technology progresses. If Cleopatra’s nose had been
shorter, there would have been no Actium, and Nicopolis would not have
been built to commemorate Augustus’ victory; but the city could only
survive with the help of a long aqueduct. Even then its economic survival
cannot have been easy; the rich plain of Arta which lies at its door did not
come into being until the Middle Ages10, and could not be fully exploited
until modern drainage had cured its swamps and their malaria11. The plain is
thus irrelevant to the problem of Nicopolis, but this became clear only when
it had been dated.
  So far we have considered soils which in some way favour or require some
particular agricultural mode of operation. More generally, one can contribute
to the problems central to this volume by considering the total available
cultivable land during the period in question. In many parts of the Old World,
for example, extensive areas of soil are localized on a small number of datable
alluvial deposits12. While it is impossible to state categorically that the valleys
were composed of bare bedrock prior to the deposition of these alluvial
bodies, one can at least specify when they came into being by means of
archaeological, radiocarbon or other dating techniques. In Iran, for example,
there have been two major periods of alluvial accumulation, of which the
earlier took place roughly between 40,000 and 10,000 years ago13. Even with¬
out postulating depositional conditions propitious to floodwater farming it is
difficult to evade the conclusion that this period was more favourable to
experiments in agriculture than, say, the current phase of downcutting. What
is more, aggradation ultimately both called for, and made possible, the excava¬
tion of qanatsu. In this respect geological change can be said to have prompted
something more than opportunism.
  The formation of China’s loess deposits is analogous in that on its date
hinge a number of theories regarding early exploitation of the land15. But it has
to be remembered that soil may be lost as well as gained, and in ways more
decisive than merely by a decline in its fertility or an increase in its salinity.
Raikes has suggested that Beidha may have been abandoned principally
because its soil was eroded16. There may be other early farming sites where
erosion has removed all traces of advantageous geological conditions; but
there are many (some of them already excavated) where the evidence has
survived.
34   Port I Environmental background      vita-finzi




      Notes
      1 Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100.
      2 Flannery, K. V., this volume, ibid.
      3 Bryan, K. (1929). Floodwater farming, Geog. Rev., 19, pp. 444-56.
      4 Miller, J. P. and Wendorf, F. (1958). Alluvial chronology of the Tesuque
        Valley, New Mexico, J. Geol., 66, pp. 177-94.
      5 Vita-Finzi, C. (1966). The Hasa Formation, Man, 1, pp. 386-90.
      6 Bryan, K. (1954). The geology of Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, Smith¬
        sonian Misc. Coll., 122 (7).
      7 Bryan, K. (1954). op. cit. p. 46.
      8 Bryan, K. (1954). op. cit. p. 45.
      9 Flannery, K. V., this volume, ibid.
     10 Higgs, E. S. and Vita-Finzi, C. (1966). The climate, environment and
        industries of Stone Age Greece; Part II, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 32, pp. 1-29.
     11 Admiralty Handbook of Greece. (1945). 3, p. 36.
     12 Vita-Finzi, C. (1969). The Mediterranean Valleys. Cambridge.
     13 Vita-Finzi, C. (In press). Quaternary alluvial chronology of Iran, Geol.
        Rdsch.
     14 Wulff, H. E. (1968). The Qanats of Iran, Scientific American, 218, pp.
        94-105.
     15 Smalley, I. J. (1968). The loess deposits and Neolithic culture of northern
        China, Man, 3(2), pp. 224-41.
     16 Raikes, R. L. (1966). Beidha. Prehistoric climate and water supply,
        Palestine Exploration Quarterly, 98, pp. 68-72.
      W. VAN ZEIST

      Reflections on prehistoric environments in
      the Near East


      Introduction

In all discussion of the domestication of plants and animals in the Near East,
prehistoric environments and especially changes in the environment play an
important part. The stimulating theory that a general desiccation of North
Africa and South-west Asia after the last glacial period was a direct factor in
the origin of domestication has, of course, been abandoned. This by no means
implies, however, that the question as to how far changes in climate may have
affected the evolution of food production is no longer important. Further, the
distribution of the wild ancestors of the domesticates in earlier times would
have depended upon the environmental conditions. Harlan and Zohary are
quite correct in warning that the domestication of cereals may not have taken
place where the wild species were most abundant1. On the other hand,
it is not likely that farming started outside the distribution area of wild
cereals.
  At present, there is a serious discrepancy between demand and supply of
information on the Late Quaternary2 climatic and vegetational history of the
Near East. One tries in such a case to make the utmost of the little information
on palaeo-environment so far available; but this easily results in generaliza¬
tions and far-reaching conclusions which are not justified at the present state
of knowledge. Besides, the same palynological information is not infrequently
brought forward as evidence for more or less contradictory opinions.
  In this paper I shall try to suggest along what lines palaeobotanical informa¬
tion may be utilized in reconstructing prehistoric environments. This dis¬
cussion will inevitably lead to an attempt to reconstruct the distribution of the
major vegetational units in the past. I wish to stress that one should not rely
too heavily on these reconstructions, since they are based on too scanty
evidence. They are mainly intended to serve as illustrations of the reasoning
pursued. It is to be hoped that in the not too remote future speculations on
palaeo-environments in the Near East can be replaced by more firmly
established conclusions.
36     Part I Environmental background      van zeist


     The locations of prehistoric settlements and of pollen-diagram sites referred
to in this paper are shown in Fig. 3.



         The present natural vegetation zones

A satisfactory reconstruction of the vegetation in earlier times requires a
sufficiently dense network of pollen diagrams covering the region concerned.
Although the prospects for more palaeobotanical data from the Near East are
not discouraging, the scarcity of pollen-bearing sediments will always force us
to reconstruct the Late Quaternary vegetational history of this part of the
world on less ample information than is the case, for example, for western
Europe.
  When only fairly scattered palaeobotanical information is available, the
present distribution of the natural vegetation types can be very useful in
reconstructing vegetational patterns of the past. By natural vegetation we
understand the plant cover which would be present if man had not exercised
his influence. As a consequence of human activity for many thousands of
years, which often resulted in the complete destruction of the original plant
cover over large areas, the determination of the natural vegetation type can be
difficult and may lead to differences of opinion.
  The distribution of the major vegetational units in the Near East is shown
in Fig. 1. It should be stressed that this vegetation map provides a very
generalized picture. Moreover, the delimitation of the vegetational units is
often more or less arbitrary.
  The vegetation zones are determined by precipitation and temperature.
Forests constitute the natural vegetation in regions with sufficient precipita¬
tion and, at the same time, where temperatures are not too low. In steppe and
desert-steppe areas, the climate is too dry for trees. At high elevations, where
alpine vegetations are found, low temperatures and especially the short
growing season prevent tree growth. Frequently between the forest and the
steppe a transitional zone with a steppe-forest vegetation is to be distinguished
or at least postulated.
  In reference to the vegetational units distinguished in Fig. 1 the following
remarks can be made. The forest vegetations can be divided into two major
ecological groups. Mesic forests occur in areas receiving sufficient precipita¬
tion spread over the whole year, while xeric forests must endure a more or
less severe dry period in the summer. Mesic forest types, which are character¬
ized by a large number of deciduous tree species, are found in the regions
adjoining the Black Sea and the Caspian.
  Within the summer-dry forests, a distinction is made between those which
do not tolerate cold (Mediterranean vegetations) and the temperate to hardy
forest vegetations. The thermophilous Mediterranean vegetations consist
largely of evergreen trees and shrubs and of pines.
                                                    Prehistoric environments in the Near East     37




—
              MEDITERRANEAN VEGETATION

       SH MESIC FOREST

       ffiy/JX TEMPERATE TO HAROY FOREST
       \'//‘X 3TEPPE FOREST
•j-.   EZ>^e
             | OESERT STEPPE

       I      ALPINE VEGETATION




            Fig 1 Vegetation map of the eastern Mediterranean region
                        (adapted from vegetation maps for Iran (Bobek, H. (1951). Die naturlichen
                        Walder und Geholzfluren Irans, Bonner Geographische Abhandlungen, 8;
                        Zohary, M. (1963). On the Geobotanical Structure of Iran, Bull, of the Re¬
                        search Council of Israel, nd, Suppl.), Turkey (Louis, H. (1939). Das natiir-
                        liche Pflanzenkleid Anatoliens, Geogr. Abhandh3, Reihe, Heft 12), Syria
                        (Pabot, H. (1957). Rapport au gouvernement de Syrie sur l’ecologie vegetale
                        et ses applications, FAO Rapport No. 663 (Rome)), Lebanon (Pabot, H. (1959).
                        Rapport au gouvernement du Liban sur la vegetation sylvo-pastorale et son
                        ecologie, FAO Rapport No. 1126 (Rome)), and Palestine (Zohary, M. (1962).
                        Plant Life of Palestine, New York).)
38     Part I Environmental background     van zeist


     The temperate to hardy summer-dry forest belt includes a few regionally
different types. In the Zagros Mountains of western Iran and north-eastern
Iraq, the deciduous Persian oak (Quercus persica) is the most common tree3.
In general, deciduous oaks are dominant in the forests of south-eastern
Turkey, but in this area tree junipers can likewise play an important part.
Although deciduous oaks are by no means absent in south-western and
western Turkey, tree junipers and pine are the main constituents of the
forest. In the south-west, cedar (Cedrus libani) and Cilician fir (Abies cilicica)
are common at higher elevations, between 1000 and 2000 m.4 The cedar-
forest zone in Lebanon and western Syria is likewise included in the temperate
to hardy forest belt5. In northern Turkey, deciduous oaks as well as pine play
an important part in the summer-dry forests.
     The extent of the original steppe-forest vegetation is most difficult to
establish. This is because these areas have been under intensive cultivation for
many years. Louis6 does not distinguish a separate steppe forest in Turkey
and it looks as if Pabot’s7 criteria for delimiting this zone do not correspond
with those of Bobek8 and Zohary9. Among the trees and shrubs which are at
home in the steppe forest are pistachio and almond.
     The last ecological zone to be mentioned is the steppe where aridity is a
common feature. Since steppes occur at elevations ranging from 200 to more
than 1500 m. above sea level, temperature conditions can differ quite con¬
siderably. A characteristic plant of many Near Eastern steppe vegetations is
the sagebrush species Artemisia herba-alba. Where the mean annual precipita¬
tion drops below 100 mm., the relatively rich steppe vegetations give way to
those of the desert steppe, which are much poorer in number of species as
well as in overall plant cover.



        The palynological information

To date, the most complete published palaeobotanical record for the Late
Quaternary in the Near East, is that from Lake Zeribar, situated in the
Zagros Mountains of western Iran, at an elevation of c. 1300 m.10 The
natural vegetation in the Lake Zeribar area is the Zagrosian oak forest. Since
ihe palaeobotanical results obtained from the Lake Zeribar sediment cores
fill a key-position in the discussions on the Late Quaternary climatic and

Fig 2 Generalized pollen diagram for sediments from Lake Zeribar, western
       Iran
       (van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E. (1963). Preliminary pollen studies at Lake
       Zeribar, Zagros mountains, south-western Iran, Science, 140, pp. 65-7; van
       Zeist, W. (1967). Late Quaternary vegetation history of western Iran, Rev.
       Palaeobot. Palynol., 2, pp. 301-11. The diagram shows the ratio between
       arboreal and non-arboreal pollen and some selected pollen types. The radio¬
       carbon dates (Yale Radiocarbon Laboratory) between brackets are from the
       lower part of the I-13 core.)
       POLLEN ZONES
                              1-13




4-




6-




       C
8-




                               63-J


10-

                              [5.460+120 B R]




        B
                               8.100 + 160 B.P



is-




      A-2



                               13 650± 160 B P
                              [14 800 + 300 BP]


20-




      A-1




25
                              22.600 + 500 B.P




3—DOPAA               *   *
40     Part I Environmental background     van zeist


vegetational history of the Near East, they will be reviewed briefly. A simpli¬
fied pollen diagram from Lake Zeribar is shown in Fig. 2.
     The lower part of this diagram (zone A-i), covering the period from
c. 22,500 to c. 14,000 b.p., shows high values for Chenopodiaceae and
Artemisia, whereas tree pollen is virtually absent. This pollen zone fits the
modern pollen precipitation of the plateau steppe of north-western Iran11,
suggesting that at that time the climate was cooler as well as drier than it is to¬
day. Sediment cores from two other sites in western Iran, viz. from Lalabad
Springs and Lake Nilofar, both in the Kermanshah valley at about 1300 m.
above sea level, show similar pollen assemblages for the period concerned. As
apparently no trees were present in the wide surroundings of Lake Zeribar
nor in the Kermanshah valley, it seems justified to conclude that between
22,500 and 14,000 b.p. forest and steppe forest were absent from the greater

part of the Zagros, if trees had not disappeared altogether from western Iran.
It should be stressed that it is not only low temperatures which would have
been responsible for this scarcity or absence of trees, but also the dryness.
While lower temperatures caused a depression of the upper tree line, it was
the aridity which prevented tree growth at elevations where temperature was
not the limiting factor.
     The palaeobotanical record suggests a change in climate from c. 14,000
b.p.   onwards (zone A-2). Annual precipitation as well as temperature in¬
creased. Very probably, the aspect of the regional vegetation did not undergo
conspicuous changes for some time. It was perhaps not until shortly before
10,000 b.p. that trees made their appearance in the Lake Zeribar region.
     The diagram section covering the period from c. 10,000 to c. 6000 b.p.
(zone B) shows a gradual increase of tree-pollen percentages. For that period,
an oak-pistachio steppe forest is postulated which, in the course of time,
thickened to some extent.
     After about 6000 b.p. (zone C) the open oak-pistachio vegetation changed
into the oak forest which at present constitutes the natural vegetation in this
part of the Zagros Mountains. A similar transition to an oak forest can be
observed in the diagram from Lake Mirabad, at an elevation of c. 800 m.12
     One conspicuous outcome of the palaeobotanical study of sediment cores
from western Iran is undoubtedly the conclusion that during the last cold
phase of the ultimate glaciation the climate was definitely dry. The question
arises whether this was true for the whole of the Near East or whether it was
only a more regional phenomenon.
     No palaeobotanical information is available from other parts of the Near
East for the period concerned. The upper 80 m. of the Ashdod core at the
Mediterranean coast of Israel turned out to be barren of pollen13. Con¬
sequently, the diagram prepared from this core does not provide information
on the vegetation of western Israel during Late Pleistocene times. The fairly
high Chenopodiaceous percentages obtained for regression phases, which
                                 Prehistoric environments in the Near East     41


would correspond with glacial periods, could indicate that also during earlier
glaciations periods with a dry climate occurred.
  On the other hand, pollen diagrams from Ioannina, in north-western
Greece, and from Tenagi Philippon, in north-eastern Greece, demonstrate
that the dry climate of the last part of the ultimate glaciation was not confined
to western Iran14. The Ioannina diagram points to a steppe forest or to a
mosaic of forest and steppe for the period between c. 30,000 and 14,000 b.p.,
while the Tenagi Philippon diagram reflects a steppe-like vegetation during
the last glacial period.
  The pollen evidence from both western Iran and northern Greece sug¬
gests that between c. 30,000 and 14,000 years ago, the climate in the Near
East was not only colder than it is at present, but that it was also considerably
drier. This conclusion is supported by Bobek’s geomorphological studies,
which suggest that on the interior plateau of Iran, the influence of continent-
ality has been strengthened rather than weakened during the cold spells of the
Pleistocene15.
  From his geological studies in Libya Hey concluded that between 32,000
and 12,000 b.p., temperatures were lower and the winters wetter than they are
today16. This would indicate that the climatic conditions in North Africa
during the Late Pleistocene were not wholly comparable with those in the
Near East.



       The reconstruction of the past vegetation

What would have been the vegetation in the Near East for the period between
c. 35,000 and 14,000 b.p., assuming that over the whole region the climate
was cooler as well as drier than it is today ? It has already been stated that the
palynological study of sediment cores in western Iran leads to the conclusion
that during the period concerned, at least the greater part of the Zagros must
have been treeless. Since it was dryness which would have prevented tree
growth at lower elevations, it is apparent that the Mesopotamian and Syrian
lowland, where temperatures were higher and precipitation lower than in the
mountains, would not have been at all suitable for trees.
  Climatic conditions in the interior of Turkey would not have differed much
from those in western Iran during the last cold spell of the ultimate glaciation.
Consequently, at that time the larger part of Turkey would also have been
covered by treeless vegetations.
  It is likely that forests and steppe forests were confined to a few areas, which
at present receive appreciable amounts of rain at lower elevations. The
precipitation map (Fig. 3) indicates that such areas could have been found in
the mountains along the Mediterranean in Lebanon, western Syria and south¬
western Turkey. Furthermore, the mountainous regions adjoining the Black
Sea and the Caspian would have supported forest vegetations.
42   Part I Environmental background        van zeist




Fig 3 Precipitation map of the eastern Mediterranean region
      (The isohyets for Iran and Iraq are redrawn from Wright, H. E. (1961).
      Pleistocene Glaciation in Kurdistan, Eiszeitalter und Gegenwart, 12, Fig. 1.
      The isohyets for Palestine are redrawn from Zohary, H. (1963). Plant Life of
      Palestine, New York, Map 3. The isohyets for Syria are drawn from an un¬
      published precipitation map kindly made available by Dr. Y. I. Barkoudah
      (Damascus). Data for Turkey is taken from Walter, H. (1955). Die Klima-
      Diagramme der Tiirkei, Stuttgart; and data for Lebanon is taken from Pabot,
      H. (1959). Rapport au gouvernement du Liban sur la vegetation sylvo-
      pastorale et son ecologie, FAO Rapport No. 1126, (Rome). The location of early
      neolithic sites (10,000-8000 b.p.) which yielded botanical evidence for farming
      (•) and of pollen-diagram sites (X) is likewise shown. The diagrams from
      Bozova and Golbasi, in south-eastern Turkey, cover only the last 3000 years
      (van Zeist, W., Timmers, M. W. and Bottema, S. (In press). Studies of
      Modern and Holocene Pollen Precipitation in South-eastern Turkey,
      Palaeohistoria, 14), and for that reason they are not discussed in this paper.
      The study of the sediment core from Jisr-el-Chaghur, in north-western Syria,
      is in its initial stage.)
                                 Prehistoric environments in the Near East    43


   In the Ruwandiz area, at the foot of a very high and massive section of the
Zagros-Taurus mountain arc, mean annual precipitations of c. 1000 mm. are
reported for stations at about 1000 m. above sea level17, suggesting that there
also tree growth could have continued in the dry and cold period prior to
14,000 b.p. In this connection it must be mentioned that in the same area,
Wright observed Pleistocene cirques at 1500 m., which are attributed to the
last glacial phase18. It is clear that a snowline at about 1500 m. cannot be
reconciled very well with a possible occurrence of trees between let us say 800
and 1200 m. If the snowline depression was caused by a decrease in tempera¬
ture alone, the mean annual temperature must have dropped at least I2°C.
Since at lower elevations there is no geologic or palaeontologic evidence for a
temperature depression of I2°C, Wright remarks “that it is probable that the
glaciation was the result of increased snowfall as well as moderately lower
temperature”. However, the palynological results indicate that the last cold
phase of the Pleistocene was dry, implying that a temperature depression of
120 would hardly have been large enough to effect this extensive glaciation.
For that reason it seems justified to assume that the last major snowline
depression must not be correlated with the cold phase from between c. 30,000
and 14,000 b.p., but with an earlier and moister glacial phase. It should be
emphasized that this Pleistocene tree refuge area in north-eastern Iraq is a
very hypothetical one. I only wish to point to the possibility that here climatic
conditions may have enabled tree growth.
   It is obvious that not only the steppes and desert steppes, but also the
alpine vegetations covered considerably larger areas than they do today.
   After about 14,000 b.p. trees started to spread from their refuge areas. It is
not impossible that the Late-Pleistocene forests along the Black Sea and the
Caspian did not contribute essentially to the reforestation of the Near East as
the summer-dry climate of the interior was too unfavourable for the trees
from these mesic forests. Most probably it was the forests along the Mediter¬
ranean in Lebanon, western Syria, and south-western Turkey—and the
refuge area in north-eastern Iraq, if this existed at all—which provided the
trees which were going to re-occupy large parts of the Near East.
   As for the vegetation between c. 10,000 and 8000 b.p., the period in which
the beginning and early spread of agriculture in the Near East took place, the
following can be said. The pollen record for western Iran indicates that
during the period concerned, steppe forests were found in areas where
nowadays the Zagrosian oak forest constitutes the natural vegetation. This
would imply that 10,000 to 8000 years ago the vegetation in the Zagros
Mountains had a “drier” character than it has today. Assuming that the same
was true for the whole of the Near East, the present summer-dry forest
region in the interior of Turkey would wholly or for the greater part have been
covered with steppe-forest vegetations. Since steppes would have occupied
the present steppe-forest areas, the belts in which tree growth took place were
narrower than they would be today if there had been no human interference.
44     Part I Environmental background,    van zeist


In short, between c. 10,000 and 8000 b.p., the vegetation would generally
have been more open than later in the Postglacial (from about 6000 b.p.
onwards).
  Although it is admitted that the above outline of the vegetational pattern in
early post-glacial times is very speculative, the fact remains that the palaeo-
botanical evidence suggests that at least in western Iran the climate during
this period was drier than it is today. What does this “dryness” mean ? It is
obvious to think first of less precipitation. However, the geographical position
of the neolithic sites of Ali Kosh in Iranian Khuzistan, Ramad near Damascus,
and Beidha in western Jordan, which yielded botanical evidence for the
cultivation of crop plants and which date from well before the introduction of
irrigation farming, cannot be reconciled with the assumption of less rainfall.
     At Ali Kosh, the growing of emmer wheat and barley must have constituted
a major component of the economy in the period between c. 8700 and 8000
b.p.19 At present, the annual precipitation at AH Kosh amounts to about
300 mm. With a decrease of the precipitation dry farming in this area would
soon become marginal and it would no longer provide a dependable food
supply. It is difficult to imagine how the inhabitants of Ramad (c. 8000 b.p.)
could have depended to a large extent upon dry farming if the precipitation
was less than the present amount of c. 250 mm. per year20. It is not likely that
at Beidha (c. 8950-8550 b.p.) agriculture played an important part, but the
mere fact that plants were cultivated indicates that the mean annual rainfall
cannot possibly have been less than the estimated 200 mm. of today21.
     The site of Jericho, with a mean annual precipitation of 140 mm.22, will not
be considered. It is unlikely that dry farming was ever possible there. Con¬
sequently, one must assume that the barley, wheat and pulses, recovered from
pre-pottery neohthic layers at Jericho (c. 10,000-8500 b.p.)23, had been
traded with farmers from the more moisture receiving uplands.
     The greater dryness suggested by the pollen assemblages in zone B of the
Zeribar diagram could be explained by assuming that during that period the
annual precipitation was not less than it is today, but that as a result of
higher temperatures, or of a longer rainless period, the summers were drier.
The indications for intermittently low water levels in Lake Zeribar during
pollen zone B support this hypothesis24. The great summer dryness could
have prevented the establishment of forests in the larger part of the Zagros
and in other areas.
     On the other hand, in the warm and summer-dry regions of the Near East,
cereals and legumes complete their vegetation cycle before it becomes really
hot, just as do the other annuals. For that reason a greater dryness during the
summer will not affect these crop plants. It is the precipitation in the autumn,
winter and spring which determines whether dry farming is possible.
     Finally, a few speculations can be made concerning the distribution of wild
einkorn (Triticum boeoticum), wild emmer (Triticum dicoccoides), and wild
barley (Hordeum spontaneum) in the past. In south-eastern Turkey, northern
                                 Prehistoric environments in the Near East     45

Iraq, and western Iran, primary habitats of wild wheats and barley are found
in the forest belt. Wild barley may also be common in the steppe-forest zone
below the deciduous oak forest, and, moreover, this species penetrates the
steppe and desert steppe in wadi bottoms25.
   It has already been set forth that in the last cold phase of the Pleistocene,
forest and steppe forest were probably obliterated from the greater part of the
Zagros-Taurus mountain arc, if trees had not disappeared altogether. This
would imply that in this region a zone where climatic conditions are favour¬
able for wild cereals did not exist or that at least it was greatly diminished. If
forest or steppe forest could survive in the Ruwandiz area, one may assume
that wild cereals also found a refuge there. Furthermore, wild barley occurred
probably in the wadis of the low and relatively warm steppes and desert
steppes. Western Syria, Lebanon and adjacent areas would certainly have
provided suitable habitats for wild emmer and barley. It is not unlikely that in
western Turkey, where at present primary habitats of wild einkorn are met
with, this species survived in the coastal area.
   Like the trees, wild cereals would have spread from their refuge areas after
14,000 b.p. The distribution of wild wheats and barley at about 10,000 b.p. or
soon afterwards would not have differed much from that of today. It has
been suggested that palaeobotanical and archaeological evidence together
lead to the conclusion that between 10,000 and 6000 b.p. the precipitation in
the autumn, winter and spring can hardly have been less than it is at present,
but that the summers were drier. Since summer dryness does not affect
annuals such as wild cereals, one may assume that the areas which in early
post-glacial times provided suitable habitats for these species were to a large
extent the same as the present-day ones26.



      Notes

      1 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and
        barley, Science, 153, pp. 1074-80.
      2 The Quaternary, the youngest main period of the geological time scale, is
        subdivided into the Pleistocene and the Holocene or Postglacial. The
        Pleistocene/Holocene border is dated to 10,300 b.p.
      3 Bobek, H. (1951). Die natiirlichen Walder und Geholzfluren Irans,
        Bonner Geographische Abhandlungen, 8; Zohary, M. (1963). On the
        Geobotanical Structure of Iran, Bull, of the Research Council of Israel,
        1 id. Supplement.
      4 Louis, H. (1939). Das natiirliche Pflanzenkleid Anatoliens, Geographische
        Abhandlungen, 3. Reihe, Heft 12.
      5 Pabot, H. (1957). Rapport au gouvernement de Syrie sur l’ecologie
        vegetale et ses applications FAO Rapport No. 663, Rome; Pabot, H.
        (1959). Rapport au gouvernement du Liban sur la vegetation sylvo-
        pastorale et son ecologie, FAO Rapport No. 1126, Rome.
      6 Louis, H. (1939). ibid.
      7 Pabot, H. (1957). ibid.
      8 Bobek, H. (1951). ibid.
46   Part I Environmental background      VAN zeist


      9 Zohary, M. (1963). ibid.
     10 van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E. (1963). Preliminary Pollen Studies at
         Lake Zeribar, Zagros Mountains, South-western Iran, Science, 140, pp.
         65-7; van Zeist, W. (1967). Late Quaternary Vegetation History of
                                                   ,
        Western Iran, Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol., 2 pp. 301-11; Wasylikowa, K.
        (1967. Late quaternary plant macrofossils from Lake Zeribar, Western
        Iran, Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol., 2, pp. 313-18.
     11 Wright, H. E., McAndrews, J. H. and van Zeist, W. (1967). Modern
        pollen rain in western Iran, and its relation to plant geography and
        quaternary vegetational history, J. Ecol., 55, pp. 415-43.
     12 van Zeist, W. (1967). ibid.
     13 Rossignol, M. (1962). Analyse pollinique de sediments marins Quatern-
        aires en Israel. II.—Sediments Pleistocenes, Pollen et Spores, 4, pp.
         121-48.
     14 Bottema, S. (1967). A late quaternary pollen diagram from Ioannina,
        North-western Greece, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp. 26-9; van der
        Hammen, T., Wijmstra, T. A., and van der Molen, H. (1965). Palyno-
        logical study of a very thick peat section in Greece, and the Wiirm-
        glacial vegetation in the Mediterranean Region, Geologie en Mijnbouw,
        44) PP- 37-9-
     15 Bobek, H. (1963). Nature and Implications of Quaternary Climatic
        Changes in Iran, UNESCO-WMO-Symposium on Changes of Climate,
        Rome Oct. 1961, pp. 403-13.
     16 Hey, R. W. (1963). Pleistocene Screes in Cyrenaica (Libya), Eiszeitalter
        und Gegenwart, 14, pp. 77-84.
     17 Wright, H. E. (1961). Pleistocene Glaciation in Kurdistan, Eiszeitalter und
        Gegenwart, 12, pp. 131-64 (Table 2).
     18 Wright, H. E. (1961). ibid.
     19 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The Prehistory of South-western
        Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp. 147-206.
     20 de Contenson, H. and van Liere, W. (1964). Sondages a Tell Ramad en
        1963. Rapport Preliminaire, Annales Archeologiques de Syrie, 14, pp.
        109-24; de Contenson, H. and van Liere, W. (1966). Seconde campagne &
        Tell Ramad. Rapport Preliminaire, Annales Archeologiques Arabes
        Syriennes, 16, pp. 167-74; van Zeist, W. and Bottema, S. (1966). Palaeo-
        botanical investigations at Ramad, Annales Archeologiques Arabes
        Syriennes, 16, pp. 179-80; Vogel, J. C. and Waterbolk, H. T. (1967).
        Groningen radiocarbon dates VII, Radiocarbon, 9, pp. 107-55.
     21 Kirkbride, D. (1966). Five Seasons at the Pre-Pottery Neolithic village of
        Beidha in Jordan, Palestine Exploration Quarterly, 98, pp. 8-61; Helbaek,
        H. (1966). Pre-Pottery Neolithic farming at Beidha, Palestine Exploration
        Quarterly, 98, pp. 61-6.
     22 Zohary, M. (1962). Plant Life of Palestine. New York. (Table 1.)
     23 Kenyon, K. M. (i960). Excavations at Jericho, 1957-58, Palestine Explora¬
        tion Quarterly, 92, pp. 88-108; see Hopf, M. this volume, pp. 355-9;
        Stuckenrath, R. (1963). University of Pennsylvania Radiocarbon Dates VI,
        Radiocarbon, 5, pp. 82-103; Barker, H. and Mackey, J. (1963). British
        Museum natural radiocarbon measurements IV, Radiocarbon, 5, pp.
        104-8.
     24 Wasylikowa, K. (1967). ibid.
     25 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
     26 After the manuscript had been submitted, I became acquainted with the
        publication of two pollen diagrams from the Bolu area, in north-western
        Turkey (Beug, H.-J. (1967). Contributions to the postglacial vegeta¬
        tional history of northern Turkey, in Cushing, E. J. and Wright, H. E.
        (eds.) Quaternary Paleoecology, pp. 349-56). Beug’s results do not require
        the reconsideration of any of the viewpoints set forth in this paper.
      DANIEL ZOHARY

      The progenitors of wheat and barley in relation to
      domestication and agricultural dispersal in the Old
      World


      Introduction

Students of the origin of old world cultivated plants will probably remember
the present decade as the “archaeological decade”. The recent archaeological
activity in Western Asia clearly shows that by 7000 b.c. farming villages had
been established over the wide arc spanning the western flanks of the Zagros
Mountains in Iran and Iraq, Southern Anatolia, spreading southward into
Palestine1. More important, in several excavations, such as Jarmo in Iraq, Ali
Kosh and Tepe Sabz in Iran, £atal Hiiyiik and Hacilar in Anatolia, and
Beidha in Jordan, a considerable amount of plant remains has been un¬
earthed. These have been critically examined and brilliantly identified by
several workers and particularly by Hans Helbaek of the Danish National
Museum2. It is now well established that the neolithic agricultural develop¬
ment in Western Asia depended primarily on domestication and subsequent
cultivation of three species of cereals: (1) Einkorn wheat {Triticum mono-
coccwri), (2) Emmer wheat (Triticum dicoccum), and (3) Two-row barley
(.Hordeum vulgare ssp. distichum). Thus we have a definite answer to the
cardinal question: what were the primitive crops at the initiation of agricul¬
ture. In terms of the origin of Old World cultivated plants, these archaeological
finds are no doubt the critical “missing links” which enable us to reconstruct
the events of domestication more definitely.
  Now that the identity of the West Asiatic principal early crops is well
established, the genetical and botanical information concerning relationships
between tame and wild cereal species can be reassessed, and the evolution of
cultivated types more soundly understood.
  First, we have ample botanic and genetic evidence to determine definitely
what are the wild ancestors of the neolithic primitive cultivated cereals.
Following this, the distribution, ecology and various biological characteristics
of the wild species can be surveyed, in order to find out whether they might
48     Part I Environmental background     zohary

have some bearing on the questions of where, when and how crop domestica¬
tion began and developed in the Old World.
     The present paper starts with a survey of the wild ancestors, reviewing the
main genetic reasons why these wild plants should be considered as progeni¬
tors of the barley and wheats cultivated by the neolithic farmers. It continues
with a review of their distinct ecology and several other biological traits,
stressing features relevant to domestication and to the spread of agriculture.



        Einkorn wheat
It is now clear that wild Triticum boeoticum (PI. vm) is the only candidate for
the ancestry of cultivated einkorn, T. monococcum. The reasons for this can be
summarized as follows: both wild and cultivated einkorns are morphologically
similar. Both have diploid chromosome numbers (2n — 14), and domesticated
and wild einkorns show close genetic affinities: hybrids between wild T.
boeoticum and cultivated T. monococcum are completely fertile, and chromosome
pairing in meiosis is normal. Genetically, the two types should be regarded
as mere races and not as fully separated species.
  The main distinguishing trait between wild einkorn and cultivated einkorn
lies in the biology of seed dispersal. This difference is conspicuously reflected
in the morphology of the rachis of the ear. In wild einkorn we have brittle
ears; and the individual spikelets disarticulate at maturity to disperse the
seed. In cultivated einkorn, this essential adaptation to wild conditions no
longer exists. The mature ear stays intact and breaks only upon threshing.
Survival depends on reaping and sowing.
  Wild T. boeoticum shows a relatively wide distribution area. It is spread
over Western Asia and penetrates also into the Southern Balkans (Greece,
Turkey, Syria, North Iraq, Transcaucasia). Its distributional centre lies,
however, in the Fertile Crescent Belt of Southern Turkey, Northern Iraq
and adjacent territories in Northern Syria, a second, smaller centre being
found in West Anatolia. In these centres, wild einkorn is massively spread as
a component of open herbaceous oak park-forests and steppe-like formations.
In addition to such primary habitats, wild einkorn also occurs as a weed,
occupying secondary habitats such as edges of cultivation and roadsides.
Sometimes it even invades fields of cultivated cereals. Edaphically, wild
einkorn shows definite affinity to basaltic soils, marls and limestones. Further
away from the centres, this wild wheat is less common and much more
sporadic in its distribution. Significantly, in these peripheral areas, it is
mainly restricted to segetal or secondary habitats, i.e. sites which were not
available before the opening up of these areas by agricultural activity.
  The wide geographic range of wild einkorn is also paralleled by wide
morphological variation and ecotypic adaptation to a relatively wide climatic
amplitude. T. boeoticum is distributed from the low, warm, summer-dry
                                        The progenitors of wheat and barley    49


foothills of the Euphrates basin, to the elevated cool and continental plateaux
and mountain ridges of Anatolia. In Turkey, its altitudinal amplitude is
0-1600 m.; in Iran and Iraq, 600-2000 m.
  Two main eco-geographic races have been recognized by botanists in wild
einkorn. A relatively small and usually one-seeded race is characteristic of the
cooler Balkans and Western Anatolia, while a larger race with two-seeded
spikelets is found in the warmer, summer-dry areas of Southern Turkey, Iraq
and Iran. However in Anatolia, all inter-gradations and intermediates be¬
tween these two extremes occur, often forming mixed, variable populations.
The small one-seeded race is usually referred to as T. boeoticum ssp. aegilo-
poides (or T. aegilopoides in older floras), while the larger two-seeded race is
commonly called T. boeoticum ssp. thaoudar (or T. thaoudar in older floras).
Fig. 1 shows the known distribution of wild einkorn as assessed from field
surveys and botanic collections3. The shaded areas in this map indicate the
regions in which wild einkorn massively occupies primary habitats, i.e. areas
in which it should be considered genuinely wild. Dots outside the shaded
areas represent sites in which T. boeoticum occurs today exclusively as a
segetal plant, i.e. places to which this grass apparently spread after the initia¬
tion of agriculture.



      Emmer wheat
Genetic and morphological evidence clearly indicate that cultivated emmer
(Triticum dicoccum) is derived from wild emmer (T. dicoccoides) (PI. vm). As in
the previous case of einkorns, here too, we are confronted with a pair of closely
related wild and domesticated types. T. dicoccum and T. dicoccoides both have
tetraploid chromosome numbers (in = 28), and hybrids between them are
fully interfertile. Wild emmer also shows striking morphological similarity to
cultivated emmer. Thus genetically, these two wheats (as well as the more
evolved, naked T. durum wheats) are again not fully separated species, but
rather races or sub-species of a single species complex. Also here, domesticated
and wild emmers are mainly separated from one another by their distinct seed
dispersal biology. Wild emmer has the typical brittle spike characteristic of all
wild cereals and the individual spikelets serve as the seed dissemination units.
In cultivated emmer the mature ears stay intact; they are separated only by
threshing, and are thus fully dependent on man for their survival.
  T. dicoccoides is more restricted in its distribution and ecology than wild
einkorn. Its range covers Israel, South Syria and Transjordan (see Fig. 2),
and its centre is found in the catchment area of the Upper Jordan Valley,
i.e. the slopes of Eastern Galilee and Gilead facing the Sea of Galilee,
the adjacent basaltic plateaux of Golan and Hauran, and further north to
the eastern slopes of Mt. Hermon. In this area, T. dicoccoides is indeed
common, particularly in places which have not been severely overgrazed.
                                                                                                                  50




                                                                                                                 Part I Environmental background




                                                                                                                  zohary




Fig i Distribution of wild einkorn Triticum boeoticum.
      Dots represent known sites, and the areas in which primary habitats occur are shaded. (Adapted from
      Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and barley, Science, 153, pp. 1074-80.)
The progenitors of wheat and barley    51




                                        kT   <u   :
                                        <L> g ^
                                        £ xt ^7
                                       ”
                                              a
                                             <u       ^

                                       •S ttli 6
                                        g §«1
                                        u 2       fl N
                                        £ 3*22
                                       1^1 &

                                        fi|fg
                                       'SgS*
                                        Tj ^ • U
                                       1 s3.§
                                       :£ g S s
                                       : *3 -a 3 ^
                                       : » g g £
                                       ■ .fi g *,.£

                                       :ih§-s

                                                  • §
                                                  < <u
                                                  > "S
                                                  ) !>




                                  CM
52     Part I Environmental background    zohary


Wild emmer occurs here as a common annual component in the herbaceous
cover of the Quercus ithaburensis park-forest belt and related semi-steppe
herbaceous formations which dominate this area. T. dicoccoides shows close
affinities to basaltic and hard limestone bedrocks. It is rare or completely
absent on marls. It usually builds mixed stands with wild barley, Hordeum
spontaneum, and wild oat, Avena sterilis.
     In contrast to wild einkorn, T. dicoccoides is rarely a weed. Over all its
distributional range it is restricted to what appear to be primary or more or
less primary habitats.
     In its geographic centre, T. dicoccoides shows a multitude of easily dis¬
tinguishable forms, and often builds conspicuously polymorphic populations
which are easily detected by the variation in hairiness and the colour of the
spikes. Also, climatically wild emmer shows a considerable range and is
distributed over a rather wide altitudinal amplitude. Robust early maturing
types are found growing in the winter-warm basin of the Sea of Galilee (as
low as ioo m. below sea level). More slender and later blooming types occur
higher in the mountains and climb up to 1500-1600 m. on the east-facing
slopes of Mt. Hermon.
     Attention should be called to the fact that in the Middle East we have two
species of wild tetraploid wheats! First, the Syro-Palestinian T. dicoccoides
which have just been discussed, and second, T. araraticum, which is dis¬
tributed over Soviet Transcaucasia, South-east Turkey, and Iraqi and
Iranian Kurdistan (see Fig. 2). The two wild tetraploid wheats are mor¬
phologically very similar and, until recently, they have usually been lumped
together and confused by botanists. But while the Syro-Palestinian wild
tetraploid, T. dicoccoides, shows close genetic affinities and full genomic
homology to our common cultivated tetraploid wheats of the emmer-durum
group, T. araraticum does not. Crosses between T. araraticum and either
cultivated T. dicoccum-T. durum, or wild Syro-Palestinian T. dicoccoides,
show strong sterility barriers. Such hybrids are also characterized by very
irregular meiosis. Thus, biologically we are faced with two folly divergent
wild tetraploid species. The first, T. dicoccoides, which is genetically closely
related to our cultivated tetraploid wheats. The second, T. araraticum, which
is genetically unrelated to domesticated emmers and durums—at least to the
emmer and the durum varieties as they occur today! There is, however, a
single exception here: T. araraticum shows close genetic affinities to endemic
T. timopheevi, a restricted, rare cultivated tetraploid wheat which was dis¬
covered by Russian botanists in a single district of Georgia, U.S.S.R.
     As with the previously described wild wheats, T. araraticum also shows
close affinities to the park-forest belt of the Fertile Crescent arc. It is a com¬
ponent of the herbaceous communities which characterize this belt of
vegetation. As far as we know, the distribution of T. araraticum is rather
sporadic. It has never yet been found to form the same extensive masses and
“wild fields” that so characterize the other two wild wheat species, T.
                                        The progenitors of wheat and barley    53


boeoticum and T. dicoccoides. It is almost always found mixed with T. boeoti-
cum, where the latter usually prevails. In South Turkey, North Iraq, and
West Iran, it grows in what seem to be genuine primary habitats (Quercus
brantii forest belt) as well as at the edges of cultivation. In Transcaucasia, its
distribution is much more restricted, and is apparently found only in places
highly disturbed by man’s activity.



      Barley

It is now clear that only a single genuinely wild species of barley is closely
related to the various cultivated barley forms, and should be regarded as their
sole ancestor4. This is two-row brittle Hordeum spontaneum. H. spontaneum
has the same chromosome number as cultivated barley H. vulgare. Both are
diploids (2n = 14); hybrids between them are fully fertile and show regular
pairing in meiosis. Again, from a genetic point of view, wild H. spontaneum
and the various forms of cultivated H. vulgare did not diverge to the extent of
representing fully independent, separated species.
  Wild barley, H. spontaneum, shows wider distribution than the wild wheats.
It is spread over a wide area in the East Mediterranean basin and the West
Asiatic countries, penetrating east as far as Turkmenia and Afghanistan5.
Like wild einkorn, wild barley occupies, at present, both primary habitats
and segetal, man-made habitats. Its distribution centre lies in the Fertile
Crescent Belt, i.e. in a wide arc, starting from Israel and Transjordan
in the south-west, stretching north towards South Turkey, and bending
south-east towards Iraqi Kurdistan and South-west Iran (see Fig. 3). In this
general area, and only here, H. spontaneum is massively and continuously
spread over primary habitats. It constitutes an important annual component
of open formations, and is particularly common in the summer-dry belt of the
deciduous oak park-forest, east, north and west of the Syrian desert and the
Euphrates basin, and the slopes facing the Jordan rift valley. From here, H.
spontaneum spills over to the drier and warmer deserts. In the Fertile Crescent
countries, H. spontaneum also occupies a whole array of secondary man-made
habitats, i.e. opencd-up Mediterranean maquis, abandoned cultivation, edges
of fields and roadsides. Further west (Aegean region and Cyrenaica) and
further east (North-east Iran, Soviet Central Asia and Afghanistan), H.
spontaneum is rare and much more sporadic in its distribution; it rarely builds
even local masses and seems to be completely restricted to segetal habitats or
to sites which have been drastically churned by man’s activity. Thus, in these
peripheral areas, wild barley does not seem to be genuinely wild! As in the
case of wild einkorn, it apparently spread to these locations as a weed, as a
consequence of agricultural activity.
  In general, wild barley does not tolerate extreme cold and it is only occasion¬
ally found above 1500 m. It is thus almost completely absent from the
                                                                                                                 54




                                                                                                                 Part I Environmental background




                                                                                                                  zohary




Fig 3 Distribution of wild barley Hordeum spontaneum.
      Dots represent known sites, and the areas in which primary habitats occur are shaded. (Adapted from
      Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and barley, Science, 153, pp. 1074-80.)
                                       The progenitors of wheat and barley   55


elevated continental plateaus of Turkey and Iran. On the other hand, it is
somewhat more xeric as compared with the wild wheats and penetrates
relatively deep into warm steppes and deserts. Morphologically too, H.
spontaneum is quite variable and several distinct races can be distinguished.
Robust types with extremely large seeds and extraordinarily long awns occur
in the catchment area of the Upper Jordan Valley, often in close association
with similarly robust T. dicoccoides forms.
  A much more slender desert type is found in the drier steppes and in
desert dry water courses. This race is sporadically spread from the Negev to
the steppic plateaux of Transjordan, northward to the Turkish border, and
eastward to Iran and Afghanistan. It is a small, grassy type with kernels only
half the size of the robust races of the Eastern Galilee. All intermediate types
between these extremes are widely spread in Palestine, Syria, Turkey and
Iran.
  Until recently, cultivated six-row barley, H. vulgare ssp. hexastichum, was
considered to have arisen not from H. spontaneum, but from what was
regarded as a second wild progenitor, brittle six-row H. agriocrithon. Brittle
six-row barley plants have been collected in several localities in the Middle
East, either as weeds in cultivation or as scattered individuals in H. spon¬
taneum stands, growing at edges of barley cultivation. Recent analysis6, how¬
ever, has demonstrated that such six-row agriocrithon plants could not be
considered as an independent, genuinely wild species. Indeed, it was found
that they are not adapted to survive under true wild conditions. They were
demonstrated to be secondary hybrid derivatives, resulting from occasional
spontaneous hybridization between six-row cultivated H. vulgare and two-
row wild H. spontaneum. These finds seem to have settled the controversy of the
monophyletic vs. diphyletic origin of cultivated barleys. The botanical and
genetic evidence is well corroborated by the archaeological finds. As amply
stressed by Helbaek7, the earlier archaeological deposits contain only two-row
barleys. Six-row barley appears later. It seems clear now that cultivated six-
row barley is derived from two-row cultivars, and that the sole wild ancestor
of all cultivated barley is H. spontaneum.



        Ecology and population structure of wild cereals
The first fact that should be emphasized is that Hordeum spontaneum, Triticum
boeoticum and T. dicoccoides are common plants in their distribution centres.
Frequently they build extensive, massive stands. In fact, all these three wild
cereals are important herbaceous constituents of the “sub-Mediterranean”
oak park-forest vegetation belt that arches over the Syrian desert and the
Euphrates basin. This belt receives a considerable amount of rain (400-1000
mm.)—but only in winter. The summer here is very warm and dry. The
vegetation is characterized by a lush growth of annuals in winter and spring.
56     Part I Environmental background      zohary


In the few places where the oak park-forest is still preserved, thick her¬
baceous cover occupies the openings between the well-spaced trees (Quercus
ithaburensis in the west, and Q. brantii in the east). Where the trees have been
destroyed or heavily coppiced, the herbaceous cover is even more uniform,
and a steppe-like landscape prevails in places unoccupied by agriculture.
Particularly rich in annuals are the hard limestone and basaltic bedrocks
with their relatively heavy soils. These rock formations occur over consider¬
able parts of the “sub-Mediterranean” oak park-forest belt. H. spontaneum,
T. boeoticum, T. dicoccoides, as well as several species of oats (Avena) and
goat-face grasses (Aegilops), are frequently dominant annuals here. They are
particularly conspicuous in places which have not been heavily overgrazed
(such places are uncommon today in the Near East!). Under heavy grazing
pressure, the wild cereals are greatly repressed, and their place is often taken
by less palatable herbs. Significantly, when the grazing pressure is relaxed,
the wild grasses usually re-establish their dominance within a few years.
     Thus in the Q. ithaburensis and Q. brantii formations and related park-
forests or “moist steppes”, that stretch from Palestine to South Turkey and
Iraqi and Iranian Kurdistan, one finds extensive “natural fields” of wild
cereals. Conspicuous examples of such massive stands occur on the basaltic
plateaus and the hard limestone slopes of Eastern Galilee and adjacent
Gilead and Golan. When the State of Israel was established two decades ago,
grazing had been regulated in the Upper Jordan Basin. Consequently, winter
growth of the wild cereals here is now largely unimpaired. All over the slopes
facing the Jordan Valley, from sea level near the Sea of Galilee to the elevated
hills near the town of Safad, H. spontaneum, T. dicoccoides and Avena sterilis
are spread in masses. On uncultivated slopes, natural fields of these wild
cereals extend over many kilometres. In their growth and total mass, these
wild fields of wheat, barley and oats are not inferior to their cultivated
counterparts. These robust wild forms can be favourably compared with their
cultivated relatives in grain production also. In rainy years, well developed
wild Eastern Galilee stands (of T. dicoccoides mixed with H. spontaneum) are
estimated to produce some 50-80 kg. of grain per dunam (1000 sq. metres).
This does not fall far behind the yields which local cultivated durum and
barley varieties produce in this region—under wooden plough agriculture
(i.e. 50-150 kg. per dunam).
     Similar extensive “fields” of wild cereals are spread over the wide arc north
and east of Palestine—i.e. Syria, Southern Turkey and east into Northern
Iraq and Western Iran. But in the centre and eastern flank of the arc, species
composition is somewhat different. Wild barley, H. spontaneum, is present
everywhere. But Palestinian tetraploid wild emmer, T. dicoccoides, is replaced
in Turkey, Iraq and Iran by diploid wild einkorn T. boeoticum—with an
occasional admixture of tetraploid T. araraticum. Conspicuous “fields” of
wild cereals with such composition are common in Gaziantep, Malatya,
Diyarbakir, Siirt provinces of Southern Turkey, and Jebel Sinjar, and the
                                       The progenitors of wheat and barley    57


700-1400 m. altitude zone of the Zagros ranges in Irbil-Sulaymaniya
provinces of Iraqi Kurdistan. They also occur in the Shahabad-Ilam area in
adjacent Western Iran. All over these hilly areas, the large robust types of
two-grained wild einkorn. T. boeoticum ssp. thaoudar prevail. Turkey, in
particular, is very rich in wild einkorn. The basaltic formations which
characterize Diyarbakir province harbour extensive, almost pure stands of this
wild diploid wheat8.
  There is, however, a very conspicuous phenological difference between
fields of wild cereals and their cultivated counterparts. As already stressed,
ears of the wild cereals disarticulate immediately upon maturation. Under
the dry hot weather that characterizes the end of the growing season in the
Near East, this process is very abrupt. In a given site and for a given wild
cereal, plants mature quickly and simultaneously. Thus, wild cereal fields
showing masses of maturing ears shed their fruits and turn into barren dry
stalks within one or two weeks! There is only a very limited time interval in
which the grain of wild cereals can be effectively collected. If an extremely
dry warm spell (“hamsin”) happens to occur at maturation time (and these
spells are quite frequent in this season) shedding of fruit can be completed in a
matter of two or three days, and the potential harvesting time shortened even
more.
  But differences in maturation time do exist between different cereals and in
different localities or ecological niches. In Israel, in mixed stands, H. spon-
taneum matures some one to three weeks earlier than T. dicoccoides. Plants
growing in sites with deep heavy soil mature somewhat later than those
occupying shallow soils. Considerable differences in the ripening time occur,
however, in different altitudes. Maturation of wild emmer at the sea level belt
near the Sea of Galilee, occurs around the end of April, while higher up in the
Safad area (alt. 700-800 m.) stands mature around I5th-20th May. In the
adjacent east-facing slopes of Mt. Hermon (alt. 14^)0-1600 m.), ripening
occurs still later—in early June. Similar altitudinal dines occur in Turkey,
Iraq and Iran. Therefore, in regions with varied topography, altitudinal
amplitude compensates for the abrupt shedding. Collectors can start their
harvest in lower elevations and proceed gradually to climb the higher slope,
and effective harvesting time is extended to last four to six weeks.



        Seed dispersal and germination of the wild cereals

As has already been pointed out in the previous sections wild wheats and
barley have fragile spikes, and their ears disarticulate immediately upon
maturity. The fragility of the spike is, in fact, the main diagnostic character
that serves for distinction of wild cereals from their cultivated counterparts.
But what is less emphasized is that the brittleness is only the most con¬
spicuous reflection of one of the major adaptations of these wild cereals to
58     Part I Environmental background       zohary


their wild environment: their specialization in seed dispersal. As annuals
under Mediterranean summer-dry conditions, these wild cereals are heavily
dependent on efficient mechanisms to disperse and plant their seed, protect
them in the long dry summer, and facilitate effective germination when rains
start in the subsequent season. The spikelet in wild wheats and the triplet in
the wild barley are, in fact, specialized arrowshaped seed dissemination units
which very effectively insert the mature fruiting units into the soil. The
elongated shape of the spikelet or the triplet, the sharpness of its base (the
rachis segment), the hairiness and the scabrosity of the unit, the strong awns
it bears, and the sterile lateral spikelets in the barley’s triplet, are all essential
elements of the dissemination and planting device. Immediately after ripen¬
ing, the individual spikelets (in wild wheats) and the individual triplets (in
wild barley) fall to the ground and operate as effective arrow-like devices for
one way “migration” of the seed into the soil. Fruit burial is a quick process;
it is completed a few weeks after shedding. The summer aspect of the wild
cereal “fields” is characterized by dry, barren stalks and effectively inserted
fruits. Only the big awns remain protruding from the ground.
     Another major adaptation of the wild cereals to their environment is
regulation of germination and facilitation of rapid development of seedlings.
In T. dicoccoides and T. boeoticum ssp. thaoudar, the dispersal unit (i.e. the
spikelet) contains two kernels. The first germinates in the ensuing winter; in
the second, germination is usually inhibited and only occurs a year later,
safeguarding these annuals against the hazards of droughts. In barley, where
only one seed occurs in each dispersal unit, differential inhibition of germina¬
tion occurs between triplets of the same ear.
     Wild wheats and barley are also characterized by a relatively larger seed,
which are as big, or almost as big, as their cultivated counterparts. This is,
apparently, also a necessary adaptation to the conditions under which these
cereals germinate and* start to develop in nature. In the lush, herbaceous
communities of the oak park-forest belt, rapid growth commences im¬
mediately after the first effective autumn rain. A big seed, with a mass of
storage material, is an obvious asset in the fierce competition for space and
light which occurs here at the beginning of the growing season.
     The size of the kernel in the wild wheats and barley is, so to speak, a
pre-adaptation for domestication. The wild cereals produce attractive large
quantities of big, easy-to-collect-and-store kernels. The main developments
under domestication were not selection for bigger seed, but the breakdown of
the seed dispersal mechanism and the “wild type” regulation of germination.
Both are essential for survival under wild conditions; but they are useless,
and even damaging, under domestication.
                                         The progenitors of wheat and barley     59




      Places of origin of the early cultivated cereals
If we assume that the main climatic and vegetation belts which are dis¬
tinguishable today in the Near East had more or less the same distribution
some 10,000 years ago, the data presented in this paper on the wild cereals
may provide clues to possible centres of early domestication.
   One of the main aims of this paper was to emphasize that at present, we
already possess ample information on the distribution, ecology and biology
of the wild cereals. More important, on the basis of the field information and
general geobotanical knowledge of the Near East, it is possible to assess fairly
accurately where these wild progenitors occupy primary habitats in contrast
to places where they occur exclusively as weeds. Of course, only in primary
habitats are these grasses genuinely wild. Only here (i.e. in the “centres”)
could they have existed prior to the advent of agriculture.
   The conclusion was reached9 that einkom wheat was probably domesticated
in South-east Turkey, and emmer wheat in the Upper Jordan watershed.
Barley could have been domesticated almost anywhere within the arc that
spans the Fertile Crescent. Furthermore, since wild barley occurs also in
relatively dry places, barley domestication could have started in less humid
sites in this belt.
   It is also clear that in the centres of their distribution, wild einkorn, wild
emmer and wild barley are widely spread and their big kernels and massive
stands could have been an obvious attraction to collectors. Harlan10 amply
records the remarkable yields of wild wheat he harvested in Turkey. Wild
fields of all the three cereals may have been harvested long before the start of
agricultural practices.



      Collection stage versus cultivation
If wild wheats and barley were indeed collected in their respective centres
long before they were domesticated, the question naturally arises as to whether
we can distinguish between the collection stage and the advent of domestica¬
tion. In other words, can we recognize domestication soon after it began?
Biologically speaking, perhaps the best way to define domestication and to
contrast it with the stage of collection is as follows:
   When a cereal is harvested and all the grain yield obtained is used as food
we are dealing with a collection stage; when a cereal is harvested and later one
part of the yield is used as food, while a second part of the grain is intentionally
planted by man, we are dealing with domestication.
   From the point of view of population genetics and considerations of
selection pressures, these two situations are diametrically opposed. Under the
system of collection the wild stands maintain themselves spontaneously, i.e.
6o   Part I Environmental background      zohary


their existence depends entirely upon the wild mode of seed dispersal. When
wild stands are being harvested grains from the less brittle plants which
constitute these populations have of course a better chance to be gathered by
man while the more brittle plants donate relatively more seed for the start of
the successive generation. Mere collection of wild stands would therefore
actively select for quick-shattering forms. By contrast, artificial planting would
mean selection in exactly the opposite direction. Non-brittle mutants which
were lethal in the first situation become advantageous under the second
system. Compared to the brittle forms, they have a better chance of con¬
tributing their seed for subsequent generations. Genes for non-brittleness are
thus strongly selected for by the system of harvesting-and-planting! Thus
under domestication, one should expect establishment of non-brittle cereals
whether or not the cultivator is conscious of this trait. Furthermore, theoretic¬
ally, such a shift from brittle to non-brittle spikes should be fast, and if the
planted populations of wheats and barley were large enough, it could have
been accomplished in a matter of only a few generations.
   In summary, the notion that man first discovered brittle mutants in wild
cereal fields, realized their potentialities and subsequently introduced cultiva¬
tion, is apparently a gross over-simplification. Non-brittle mutants were not
the cause of domestication but rather an immediate result, the consequence
of a change in the biological system when planting was introduced.
   The fact that several times (as Helbaek found in Beidha) both brittle and
non-brittle cereals have been found mixed together, is not necessarily an
indication that we are dealing with the real beginnings of domestication.
Early farmers were no doubt both collectors and cultivators, and the collec¬
tion of wild cereals could have added to the harvest obtained from the culti¬
vated plots for a long time after the advent of domestication. The critical
indication that cultivation was practised is of course the presence of some
non-brittle material.



      Aegilops squarrosa and the origin of bread wheats
Hexaploid wheats or bread wheats (Triticum aestivum) are exclusively culti¬
vated forms. They do not have wild counterparts in nature. Helbaek’s11 finds in
Anatolia, Iran and Mesopotamia indicate that these wheats started to appear
one to two millennia after the early start of domesticated einkorn and emmer.
Cytogeneticists have fully analysed the mode of formation of T. aestivum12.
Bread wheat has been demonstrated to be a hybridization-and-fusion product.
It contains two sets of chromosomes (genomes A and B) present in the emmer-
durum wheats and a third set (genome D) found in a wild goat-face grass
Aegilops squarrosa. In other words, hexaploid (2n = 42) T. aestivum was formed
by hybridization and subsequent chromosome doubling—which fused tetra-
ploid (2n — 28) emmer-durum wheats with diploid (in = 14) Ae. squarrosa.
                                         The progenitors of wheat and barley    61


    Since no wild hexaploid wheat occurs in nature, it seems plausible to
 assume that the formation of the bread wheats occurred only after the
 advent of wheat agriculture, and that wild Ae. squarrosa combined with a
 cultivated tetraploid wheat to form a new cultivated wheat species.
    The first conspicuous fact about Ae. squarrosa is that this goat-face grass is
 the easternmost diploid species in the Triticum-Aegilops group. Although its
 centre lies in the South Caspian area, it is widespread and very common in
 Northern Iran and adjacent Transcaucasia and Transcaspia (see Fig. 4).
 Further away from this centre, Ae. squarrosa spreads westward as far as
 Eastern Turkey and the Syrian Desert steppes, and eastward to Pakistan and
 Kashmir. In Soviet Central Asia it is recorded as far east as Kirghizia and
 adjacent parts of Khazakstan.
    Like wild barley and wild einkorn, Ae. squarrosa occupies both primary
 and segetal habitats. But only in the centre of its distribution, i.e. North
 Iran, and adjacent Transcaspia and North Afghanistan, is this plant a
frequent component in genuine steppes and “forest-steppe” formations. At
the same time, it is a noxious follower of agriculture and a common weed in
 cereal fields. Towards the periphery of its distribution, it is almost exclusively
a weed. Here, too, we are faced with a case of a wild progenitor which
apparently largely expands its distribution with the opening-up of the land
by agriculture.
   Both morphologically and ecologically, Ae. squarrosa shows an extra¬
ordinarily wide amplitude and is represented by a multitude of forms. Its
exact ecological range still requires detailed study. But it is clear that in its
distribution centre, this diploid occurs over a strikingly wide range of rather
continental climatic conditions, from the dry sage-brush steppes of the
elevated Iranian and Afghan plateaus, to the margins of deserts, and to the
temperate rain-soaked Hyrcanic forest belt at the southern coast of the
Caspian Sea.
   In summary, the morphological variation and ecological amplitude of Ae.
squarrosa are exceptionally wide; they exceed those of the other diploid
species in the Triticum-Aegilops group. Furthermore, in contrast to the more
“Mediterranean” wild emmer, this diploid extends its range into the cold
continental steppes of Central Asia. It is also a successful and agressive weed
in cereal fields. As a weed, it greatly expanded its distribution—beyond the
area of its primary habitats.
   As already pointed out by Zohary et a/.13, these features provide clues to the
place of origin of bread wheat T. aestivum and explain some of its ecological
characteristics.
   At the start of neolithic agriculture, the two contributors that fused to form
the hexaploid wheats were evidently geographically isolated. Wild emmer T.
dicoccoides was restricted to Palestine and Syria. Ae. squarrosa apparently did
not spread westward from North Iran. Contacts between the tetraploid
                                        The progenitors of wheat and barley    63


wheats and Ae. squarrosa could have been established only after the domestica¬
tion of emmer and the spread of wheat agriculture to North Iran and Armenia.
If this be true, the most likely place of origin of hexaploid wheat should have
been somewhere near the south-west corner of the Caspian Sea. Several
additional lines of evidence point to the same conclusion. As already men¬
tioned, there is no wild hexaploid wheat in nature. Furthermore, Kihara and
his group14 have demonstrated that synthetic hexaploids between T. dicoccoides
and Ae. squarrosa are weak dwarf plants, resulting from a dwarf gene which
occurs in most strains of wild emmer. In contrast, this dwarf gene has not
been found in cultivated emmer-durum varieties, and the synthetic hexa¬
ploids between the cultivated tetraploid and Ae. squarrosa develop normally.
   Ecologically, the addition of the D genome greatly changed wheat adapta¬
tion. The tetraploid wheats (emmer-durum group) were derived from a
“Mediterranean” progenitor, i.e. were adapted to the mild winters and warm,
rainless summers which characterize the Mediterranean basin. The incorpora¬
tion of the D genome rendered hexaploid wheat far more adaptive to extreme
continental conditions and sub-humid temperate climates. This is most likely
the main factor that facilitated the wide distribution and the apparent
success of hexaploid cultivated wheats over the more continental plateaux of
Asia and the colder and mesophytic areas of Europe.
   The conspicuous weedy tendencies of Ae. squarrosa should have been
another asset. When Ae. squarrosa was added to the cultivated wheat, it did
not greatly change the already acquired adaptation of the latter to thrive
under agricultural conditions. Adjustment of the new hexaploid wheats to
cultivation was therefore relatively easy.



      Self-pollination and its significance
Both wild and cultivated wheats and barleys are predominantly self-pollin¬
ated. Self-fertilization in these plants is ensured by the precocious dehiscence
of the anthers—prior to the opening of the florets. Cross-pollination occurs
occasionally, but it is a rare event amounting to only a few promils of the total
pollinations. Thus in their mating system wheats and barleys differ from the
majority of the plant species—which are cross-pollinated.
   Was it a mere chance that the first plants which were successfully domesti¬
cated in West Asia were selfers ? There is good reason to assume that this was
not the case, and that at the initiation of the Middle Eastern agriculture self-
pollinated plants were better suited or “preadapted” to domestication in
comparison to cross-pollinated plants.
   The first obvious advantage of self-pollination is the isolation established by
this mating system. Self-pollination splits the population into independent
pure lines. Under such a system two forms (e.g. brittle wild barley and a
cultivated non-brittle barley) can co-exist in the same area. They do not face
64   Part I Environmental background      zohary


the danger that the less common type will be swamped by the more common
one. If indeed domestication of cereals in the Middle East started in the same
regions where the wild progenitors were common, effective isolation of the
initial cultivated crop was a necessity. Self-pollinators had this advantage.
Cross-pollinators did not. Under a system of cross-pollination the initial small
patches of the crop would have been exposed to massive pollination by wild
type pollen. Swamping would result and maintenance of the identity of the
cultivated variety would be difficult. It is therefore not surprising that the
first plants which were successfully domesticated in the Middle East were all
selfers. Cross-pollinated crops (e.g. rye) appeared only later.
   It is also important to note that wheats and barleys are not obligatory
selfers but just predominantly self-pollinated. Rare cross-pollination occurs in
these plants. Such a mating system is admirably suited for rapid evolution and
the establishment of new forms. Inbreeding would lead to the fixation of
numerous lines, and the more attractive of them could have been easily
selected and maintained by man. The occasional cross-pollination would have
provided the crop with genetic flexibility—the possibility of combining and
reshuffling genes originating from different lines and different sources.



      Introgression and its effects
In the Mediterranean basin and in the Near East, the cultivated cereals and
their wild relatives are genetically not completely isolated from one another.
Over wide areas they grow side by side, and occasionally hybridize. In fact,
such spontaneous hybridization is followed by introgression, i.e. by gene-flow
from the wild entities to the cultivated entities. For wheat and barley, the
picture can be summarized as follows.
   Most conspicuous are the genetic relationships between the pairs of domes¬
ticated crop and wild ancestor. In Israel, for example, wild Hordeum
spontaneum frequently comes into contact with cultivated barley (H. vulgare).
At edges of cultivation, roadsides and similar habitats, sporadic hybrid swarms
between cultivated and wild barleys occur rather frequently, and gene-flow
from wild to cultivated, and vice versa, has been demonstrated15. Similar re¬
lationships are found in Israel between wild T. dicoccoides and its genetically
close related T. durum; while in Thrace and Western Anatolia, this type
of spontaneous hybridization still occurs between wild T. boeoticum and
cultivated T. monococcum.
   In the wheats, introgression occurs, not only between the interfertile domes¬
ticated and wild pairs, but also with more alien wild species. In fact, polyploid
 T. durum and T. aestivum have been found to hybridize in nature with some
dozen different species of Aegilops and Triticum, such as Ae. cylindrical Ae.
triuncialis, Ae. variabilis and Ae. longissima. Furthermore, cultivated wheats
also hybridize with their diploid progenitors, i.e. T. boeoticum, Ae. speltoides
                                         The progenitors of wheat and barley        65


and Ae. squarrosa. Such spontaneous interspecific hybrids are largely sterile,
but significantly not completely so. They do set some seed! Subsequent
backcrossing to the cultivated species results in effective introgression.
Gene-flow from the wild species to the cultivated polyploid wheat is quite
common and apparently contributes considerably to the genetic variation of
the cultivated forms. As already stressed by Zohary16, polyploid wheats
should be considered as “genetic sponges”. Polyploidy buffers the hybridiza¬
tion process and makes it possible for these plants to incorporate genetic
material from numerous different wild species.
   In the last decade, natural hybridization and introgression between culti¬
vated cereals and their wild relatives have been intensively studied and the
details of the mechanisms clarified, at least in wheats and barleys. It now
seems apparent that this process played a decisive role in the rapid evolution
and successful dispersal of the cultivated cereals. It effectively enriched
the initial cultivated crop with a wide range of genetic variation. The build-up
of variation in the cultivated crops was thus not an independent process.
Initial cultivated crops were able to utilize successfully the extensive gene
pools of their wild relatives.
   Each initial crop should therefore be envisaged as a sponge. After the
initial domestication (i.e. its becoming dependent on man) it most probably
absorbed genetic variation from adjacent wild relatives. This enlarged its
adaptive range and subsequently made it possible for it to spread and to
adapt itself to new areas. Then a new cycle of hybridization was possible with
additional locally adapted wild species—until the full range was achieved17.




      Notes
      1 Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960). Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
        Kurdistan, in Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, 31, Oriental Institute,
        Chicago, pp. 38-50; Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. (1965). Early
        agriculture and animal husbandry in Deh Luran, Iran, Current Anthro¬
        pology, 6, pp. 105-6; Mellaart, J. (1961). Excavations at Hacilar, Anatolian
        Studies, 11; Mellaart, J. (1962-5). Preliminary reports on £atal Hiiyiik,
        Anatolian Studies, 12-15; Kirkbride, D. (1966). Five seasons at the pre¬
        pottery neolithic village of Beidha in Jordan, Palestine Exploration
        Quarterly, 98, pp. 8-72.
      2 Helbaek, H. (1966). Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and
        Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20, pp. 350-60.
      3 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and
        barley. Science, 153, pp. 1074-80.
      4 Zohary, D. (i960). Studies on the origin of cultivated barley, Bull. Res.
        Counc. Israel, Sect. D, 9, pp. 21-42.
      5 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
      6 Zohary, D. (i960), ibid.; Zohary, D. (1963). Spontaneous brittle six-row
        barleys, their nature and origin, Proc. First Internat. Barley Genetics
        Symp., Wageningen, pp. 27-31.
      7 Helbaek, H. (1959). Domestication of food plants in the Old World,
66   Part I Environmental background        zohary


         Science, 130, pp. 365-72; Helbaek, H. (i960). Ecological effects of
        irrigation in ancient Mesopotamia, Iraq, 22, pp. 186-296.
      8 Harlan, J. (1967). A wild wheat harvest in Turkey, Archaeology, 20, pp.
         197-201.
      9 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
     10 Harlan, J. R. (1967). ibid.
     11 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
     12 Riley, R. (1965). Cytogenetics and the evolution of wheat, in Hutchinson,
        Sir J. (ed.) Essays on Crop Plant Evolution. Cambridge, pp. 103-25.
     13 Zohary, D., Harlan, J. R. and Vardi, A. (1968). The wild diploid pro¬
        genitors of wheat, Ms. sent to Euphytica.
     14 Kihara, H. (1965). The origin of wheat in the light of comparative
        genetics, Jap. J. Genetic., 40, pp. 45-54.
     15 Zohary, D. (i960), ibid; Zohary, D. (1963). ibid.
     16 Zohary, D. (1965). Colonizer species in the wheat group, in Baker, H. G.
        and Stebbins, G. L. (eds.) The Genetics of Colonizing Species. New York,
        pp. 404-21.
     17 New finds, pertaining to the distribution of Triticum dicoccoides have been
        recently reported on by Rao, P. S. and Smith, E. L. (1968). Studies with
        Israeli and Turkish accessions of Triticum turgidum L. emend. Var.
        dicoccoides (Koern). Bowden, Wheat Inform. Service, 26, pp. 6-7. These
        workers performed a cytogenetic analysis in several Turkish wild wheats,
        recently collected by J. R. Harlan. Their results indicate clearly that the
        wild tetraploid wheats in Southern Anatolia are not cytogenetically
        uniform, and they do not belong exclusively to the araraticum type as was
        previously assumed by Harlan and Zohary. Instead these Turkish
        collections contained both araraticum and dicoccoides types! Thus wild
        tetraploid wheats which have close cytogenetic affinities to cultivated T.
        dicoccum and T. durum are not exclusively confined to Palestine and South
        Syria. They also occur in Southern Turkey and possibly also in adjacent
        Iraq. We need, of course, further clarification of the spatial, ecological and
        genetic relationships between araraticum and dicoccoides types in Turkey,
        Iraq and Iran before a final decision can be made on whether dicoccoides
        wheats in these areas are genuinely wild, or secondarily derived. But all
        in all Rao and Smith’s data raise grave doubts whether Palestine and
        South Syria are the sole location in which domestication of emmer wheats
        could have taken place. The north and north-east parts of the arc again
        become candidates.
      Section 2: Patterns of exploitation




      C. D. DARLINGTON

       The silent millennia in the origin of agriculture


Recent advances in the widely separated fields of archaeology and genetics
lead us to question some of the ideas about the origin of agriculture which
may have earlier seemed most acceptable. One of these is the idea that the
domestication of animals in general preceded the cultivation of plants.
Another is the idea that agriculture arose independently in many different
regions both of the Old World and the New, regions which only later
coalesced. A third is the idea that agriculture began in the easiest way with the
easiest crops, that is with the root crops of tropical regions.
  These ideas have been ably expounded by Sauer, Coon, von Wissmann1
and others. They may now be most critically reconsidered in relation to the
second theory, that of the independent regional origins of crops. The view
that agriculture arose in several places independently follows almost directly
from Vavilov’s theory of crop origins. On a basis of his own expeditions to
Afghanistan, Abyssinia and Mexico, Vavilov2 suggested, in 1926, that every
species of crop plant had been taken into cultivation at a particular centre
which was marked by a recognizable region, usually very mountainous, where
it displayed a maximum of variation today.
  There were some nine of these centres which might seem to have con¬
tributed by fusion to give in the bronze age six main world divisions in the
character of agriculture like those shown for crop plants by Kuptsov3. And
these we might have supposed were independent in origin. The studies of the
last forty years, historical and geographical, have however led us to believe
that Vavilov’s centres of diversity were not so much primary as secondary, not
so much sites of origin as places of development. For example, emmer wheat
and barley had not arisen from wild plants in Abyssinia but in Syria. Sesame
and cotton had not arisen in Afghanistan but in Africa4.
68     Part I Patterns of exploitation   DARLINGTON


     One source of new understanding was in Vavilov’s own later work in the
course of which agricultural and genetical evidence took the place of his
earlier and simpler botanical notions. Another source was in evolutionary
views due partly to Darwin5 and partly to a German geographer Engelbrecht6.
On these views the main evolution of crop plants, unlike that of domesticated
animals, was due to the unconscious selection of the cultivator. The activities
of cultivation, tilling and sowing, reaping and threshing, inherently and
selectively altered the conditions of survival of the crop plant without any
such intention on the part of the cultivator. The crops themselves were in this
way thoroughly transformed in the course of a few thousand seed generations
during which nothing very striking might seem to be happening. These
transformations were silent and unconscious. They took place in parallel in
wheat, rice, maize, hemp and many other crops at different times and in
different parts of the earth.
     One of the most striking unconscious changes arising in this way was the
breakdown in most seed crops of the inbreeding inhibition. This mechanism
of breeding control by genetic incompatibility corresponds in effect to the
incest taboo in man, and is characteristic of the wild ancestors of crop
plants7. Another unconscious change on quite a different scale was the
supplanting of crops by their own weeds. It now appears that crops have been
supplanted in this way whenever they have been carried, as has happened
most obviously in Europe, into new climatic or ecological regions for which
they were constitutionally unsuited8.
     Vavilov’s imprisonment and premature death in 1943 prevented him from
developing this work and above all from seeing its implications in terms of the
dated archaeology and the new genetics which give us the foundation for our
present ideas. What we see today is the decisive evidence (of Braidwood,
Alellaart, Helbaek, and others9) that agriculture in the Old World arose in a
single connected region, a Nuclear Zone, of Anatolia, Iran and Syria before
7000 b.c. And that it arose here at a time when no other region of the Old
World shows evidence of any similar settled life. The question for us is
therefore how agriculture could come into existence about four thousand
years later in India and in Abyssinia with pardy different crops, and in China
at first widi entirely different crops. Could the origin have been independent ?
Or had cultivators moved from the old area to the new areas adopting new
crops as they moved ?
     From the point of view of the crops the answer to this question now
presents little difficulty. The crops could have been carried over by advancing
cultivators in Africa and Asia just as they were over shorter distances in
Europe. Wheat often passed over to new regions unchanged. Hexaploid
wheats seem to have reached India in the third millennium b.c. and China in
the second millennium. Tetraploid wheats came to Abyssinia probably before
the first millennium. But in all the new countries wheat was pardy replaced
by its own weeds, rye, oats, and buckwheat in the northern regions, and in
                            The silent millennia in the origin of agriculture   69

each southern region by its own millets. Gradually in India the division of the
country into three regions, depending on wheat, rice and sorghum has been
stabilized10.
   From the point of view of the land, and the means of migration, it may be
thought that such an expansion of agriculture presents a greater difficulty. In
the Oxus and Tarim basins desert sand has now largely smothered the
routes that would have been followed. We have however the evidence of
former oases on these routes11 and we know that they were used as regular and
important means of communication until the time of the Han Dynasty in
China. The deterioration of vegetation that must be assumed is of course what
we should expect to have followed grazing by the animals of the passing
farmers as well as of the intruding pastoral nomads12. Both the peasant and
the herdsman evidently spoilt their habitats and hence spoilt the prospects for
later generations.
   The passage of crops and stock across central Asia damaged the vegetation
and effectively closed the road which the first passage had opened. Similarly,
the passage of cattle and men across central Africa to the Cape promoted those
diseases of cattle and men which again effectively closed the road that their
passage had opened. In a word, the unexampled movements of the neolithic
expansion seem to have led to reactions which interrupted the movements
themselves and broke the world up into the isolated fragments of later ages,
those same geographical regions described by Kuptsov13.
   These views of crop evolution in quite a different sense bear on the problem
of the evolution of man himself. We know how closely primitive peoples
identify themselves with their crops and stock. We also know how closely they
are adapted to meeting the needs and exploiting the gifts of those plants and
animals. We may see examples in Galton’s14 (1853) or Raglan’s15 accounts of
the pastoralist in Africa and in Freeman’s account16 of the rice grower in
Borneo. The processes by which these different types of human being have
evolved may now be seen as connected with the unconscious selection by
which their crops and stock have also evolved. Men, crops and stock had
become overwhelmingly and continuously dependent on one another for their
survival. Their fitness was therefore an integrated property and their relation¬
ship reciprocal. In the silent millennia during the expansion of agriculture the
men themselves were transformed by the new relations with the plant and
animal world which they themselves were in process of establishing17.
   The evolution of man, crops and stock in these millennia was thus, I
suggest, a matter of mutual selection, a kind of process in animal and plant
adaptation where all parties to the transaction effectively modify one another.
The characters it produces are all stable when fixed in position, but unstable
when new factors are introduced into the situation. The hybridization of
cultivators and hunters would be the most universal of these new factors
during the expansion of agriculture. It would also be indispensable for
adaptation to new climates. And it evidently gave rise to new genetic
70   Part I Patterns of exploitation    DARLINGTON


combinations, new races with new habits of living, such as those long recog¬
nized in neolithic and bronze age Britain.
   The appearance of many new types of men making use of many new crops
and stock made possible expansions of the new combinations from the
Nuclear Zone. Each combination, like all races of men and animals, naturally
had its own ecologically favoured habitat and different combinations certainly
moved at different speeds. Pastoralists always covered the ground faster than
setded cultivators and even, in Africa, went in different directions18. Different
types of people thus sorted themselves out.
    One of the new differences of type that were sorted out was that between
grain and root farmers. How profoundly contrasted were the selective and
evolutionary effects of these two ways of working and living may be seen from
considering what happens today. The grain farmer, especially if he works in a
temperate climate and with a temperate calendar, depends for his success on
tilling and manuring the soil, sowing the seed, weeding and protecting the
crop, reaping the harvest, thrashing, winnowing and eventually storing the
grain. This success depends in turn on his own skill and forethought and on
what he has learnt from the inventions of his ancestors. If he neglects or
mistimes or otherwise falls short in any of these operations, failure and
famine are the penalty that he and his progeny pay. On the other hand he may
make improvements in managing or choosing his crop or his soil, in fashioning
or using his tools, his hoes, sickles or riddles, and in fixing the calendar for the
days and seasons of his work. In all these things his success brings a higher
yield, and hence a greater prosperity for a larger population; and if his
children are intelligent enough to learn from him they will propagate a more
diligent and more skilled population.
    By contrast the root farmer can and need do very little to improve his lot.
He cannot select his seed for he grows his crop direct from the roots. He can
find improved roots in the wild. With great yams, sweet potatoes and bananas
(which are in the same case, for they must be seedless) this is just what he has
done. With manioc too he can devise means of extraction of the toxic principle.
But having done these few things he can go no further. Nor is he much en¬
couraged to do so for with these crops Nature takes care of everything for him.
    Of course Nature can fail. So the potato farmers in Ireland discovered in
1846 when they could be partly saved from starvation only by imported
foreign grain, grain which they did not themselves know how to cultivate19.
But the vast extension of root and banana farming in the tropics shows us that
the simplest and easiest methods have been able to propagate and preserve
great populations in India, Africa, South America and Polynesia. These
populations fed and prospered on the root crops distributed from South¬
east Asia. But that great distribution and expansion came only during the
last 2000 years after grain growing had been brought to South-east Asia from
the Indus valley. It was later and it was derivative.
    Summing up: it was the industrious and prudent grain farmer whose
                            The silent millennia in the origin of agriculture   71


expansion created the peasant communities of Europe, Egypt, India and
China (as well as of Mexico and Peru) on which the great civilizations seem to
have been based. Root cultivation, on the other hand, as Burkill puts it20, in
relation to manioc, “advances that part of the population which contributes
least to the common good”. Easy cultivation does not select for either fore¬
sight or industry. That seems to be why South-east Asia was not a centre of
origin of agriculture.
   While the great expansions of crops and stocks were being prepared
certain industrial experiments were being promoted and chains of reaction
were being set in motion by the new grain crops. They present a problem
first enquired into by Braidwood, Oppenheim and others21. For example, fruit
growing could lead to the fermentation of wine which could be contained and
kept in gourds. But it did not lead to any wider development. Barley, on the
other hand, used as the basis of malting and hence of the brewing of beer,
would lead to the production of yeast which in turn could be applied to the
baking of bread made from the flour of bread wheat which had been ground
in stone querns and kneaded into dough. And the use, first of flat stones, and
then of ovens, for baking this bread could be connected with the invention of
pottery and the smelting of ores. All the more so because both of these,
together with bread wheat, seem to have had a single district of origin on the
northern side of the Nuclear Zone, in Anatolia, and to have arrived much
later on the southern side, in Palestine.
   If we assume a single origin for pottery as well as for agriculture, the later
distribution of pottery also sets us an important problem. Pottery is
useful or indispensable in the preparation and preservation of most human
foodstuffs. It is particularly useful in the preparation of grain by boiling as
opposed to baking. The materials for its manufacture are also almost universal.
This is perhaps why the making of pottery has repeatedly spread from its
centre of origin in the Nuclear Zone deep into Asia and Africa far outside the
area of grain growing. It has been carried, like pastoralism far in advance of
agriculture itself and by hybridization it has often passed into the hands of
otherwise largely palaeolithic people.
   Owing to their joint or integrated adaptation, the genetic possibilities that
we can expect from particular kinds of crops, stock and men are, I suggest,
somewhat precise. For this reason their behaviour, their movements and
their evolution are precisely limited. They have their rules, and if we bear in
mind that these rules are all connected many conjectures which seem beyond
examination may become useful working hypotheses.


      Notes
       1 Coon, C. S. (1954). The History of Man. New York and London; Sauer,
         C. O. (1952). Agricultural Origins and Dispersals. New York; Wissmann,
         H. von. (1957). Ursprungsherde und Ausbreitungswege von Pflanzen und
4—DOPAA   *   *
72   Part I Patterns of exploitation    DARLINGTON


         Tierzucht und Ihre Abhangigkeit von der Klimageschichte, ErdeKunde
          ii, pp. 81-94 and 176-93.
      2 Vavilov, N. I. (1926). Studies on the origin of cultivated plants, Bull. App.
         Bot., 16 (2), pp. 139-248.
       3 Kuptsov, A. (1955). Geographical distribution of cultivated flora and its
         historical development, Bull. All Union Geog. Soc., 87, pp. 220-31.
      4 Burkill, I. H. (1953). Habits of man and the origins of the cultivated plants
         of the Old World, Proc. Linn. Soc., 164, pp. 12-42; Harlan, J. R. and
         Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and barley, Science, 153,
         pp. 1074-80; Harris, D. R. (1967). New light on plant domestication and
         origins, Geog. Rev. (N.Y.), 57, pp. 90-107; Hutchinson, J. B. (1962).
         History and relationship of the world’s cottons. Endeavour, 21, pp. 5-15;
         Vavilov, N. I. (1950). The origin, variation, immunity and breeding of
         cultivated plants, Chron. Bot., 13, pp. 1-366.
      5 Darwin, C. (1868). Animals and Plants under Domestication. London.
      6 Engelbrecht, Th. (1916). Uber die Entstehung einiger feldmassig ange-
         bauter Kulturpflanzen, Geog. Z., 22, pp. 328-34.
      7 Darlington, C. D. (1943). Genetics and the evolution of the mating system
         in man, Ann. Eug., 12, pp. 44-5.
      8 Darlington, C. D. (1943). Chromosome Botany and the Origins of Cultivated
         plants (2nd ed.). London.
      9 Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960). Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
         Kurdistan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilisation, Oriental Institute,
         Chicago, 31; Helbaek, H. (1959). Domestication of food plants in the Old
         World, Science, 130, pp. 365-72; Helbaek, H. (1966). Commentary on
         the phylogenesis of Triticum and Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20, pp. 350-60;
         Mellaart, J. (1967). Catal Hiiyiik. London.
     10 Burkill, I. H. (1953). ibid.
     11 Wissmann, H. von. (1957). ibid.
     12 Darling, F. Fraser (1956). Man’s ecological dominance through domesti¬
         cated animals on wild lands, in Thomas, W. L. (ed.) Man's Role in chang¬
         ing the face of the earth. Chicago.
     13 Kuptsov, A. (1955). ibid.
     14 Galton, Sir F. (1853). Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa.
         London.
     15 Raglan, Lord (1939). How Came Civilisation? London; Raglan, Lord
         (1962). Prehistoric Men—what can we know of them. Rat. Annual,
         pp. 31-41.
     16 Freeman, J. D. (1955). Iban Agriculture. London.
     17 Darlington, C. D. (1963). Psychology, genetics and the process of history,
         Br.J. Psych., 54, pp. 293-8; Darlington, C. D. (1967). The genetics of
         society as “human society and genetics”, in Kuttner, R. E. (ed.) Race and
         Modern Science, New York; Darlington, C. D. (1969). The Evolution of
         Man and Society. London.
     18 Payne, W. J. A. (1964). The origin of domestic cattle in Africa, Emp.J.
         Exp. Agric., 32, pp. 97-113.
     19 Woodham-Smith, C. (1962). The Great Hunger. London.
     20 Burkill, I. H. (1951). The Greater Yam in the service of man, Adv. Sci., 7,
         pp. 443-8.
     21 Braidwood, R. J. et al. (1953). Did man once live by beer alone?, Amer.
         Anthrop., 55, pp. 515-26; Hartman, L. F. and Oppenheim, A. L. (1950).
         On beer and brewing techniques in ancient Mesopotamia, J. Amer. Or
         Soc. Suppl. 10.
      KENT V. FLANNERY

      Origins and ecological effects of early domestication
      in Iran and the Near East

      Introduction
Late in the Pliocene period there began a series of movements of the earth’s
crust, which caused the central plateau of Iran to be drawn closer to the stable
massif of Arabia. The land between, caught in the grip of these two far-
heavier formations, was compressed and folded into a series of parallel
mountain ridges or anticlines. Gradually the centre of this compressed zone
collapsed and subsided, so that the parallel ridges, trending from north-west
to south-east, appear to rise out of it like the successive tiers of a grandstand,
eventually reaching the Arabian and Iranian plateaus to either side. The
sunkland in between, still settling and filling with the erosion products of the
mountains, became the rolling and irregular plain known as Mesopotamia; the
parallel ridges to the east of it are the Zagros Mountains1.
  The result was an area in which altitudinal differences produce a great
number of contrasting environments in a relatively limited geographic area—
a mosaic of valleys at different elevations, with different rainfall, temperature,
and vegetational patterns. Like some of the other areas where early civiliza¬
tions arose—Mesoamerica and the Central Andes, for example—the Near
East is a region of “vertical economy”, where exchanges of products between
altitude zones are made feasible and desirable by the close juxtaposition of
four main environmental types: high plateau (c. 5000 ft.), intermontane
valleys (1500-4000 ft.), piedmont-steppe (600-1000 ft.), and alluvial desert
(100-500 ft.). A similar pattern arose in the Levant, where the same late
Pliocene tectonic movements produced the great Jordan Rift Valley, flanked
by the wooded Lebanon-Judean mountains and the arid Syrian Plateau. It
was in this kind of setting that the first steps toward plant and animal domesti¬
cation were made.
74   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY




      Stages in Near Eastern prehistory


In a recent article, Frank Hole and I have divided the prehistory of Western
Iran into three main adaptive eras2. The first was a period of semi-nomadic
hunting and gathering, which lasted until roughly 10,000-8000 b.c. The
second era we have called the period of early dry-farming and Caprine
domestication, and it seems to have involved predominantly emmer wheat
{Triticum dicoccum), two-row hulled barley (Hordeum distichum), goats
(Capra hircus), and sheep (Ovis aries). This period lasted until about 5500
b.c., and its hallmarks are already familiar to members of this symposium:
permanent villages, early hornless sheep, goats with medially-flattened and/or
helically-twisted horn cores, and cereal grain samples which show a mixture
of wild (tough-glumed, brittle rachis) and domestic (brittle-glumed, tough-
rachis) characteristics. The third adaptive era was one which involved the
previously-mentioned cultivars plus bread wheat (Triticum aestivum); six-
row barley which might be either hulled or naked (Hordeum vulgare); lentils;
grass peas; linseed; domestic cattle (Bos taurus); pigs (Sus scrofa); and
domestic dogs (Canis familiar is), and featured irrigation in those zones where
its use was feasible without elaborate technology. This era culminated, in the
lowlands at least, in the rise of walled towns, about 3000 b.c.3
  There is no reason to believe that the entire Near East went through these
eras synchronously; in addition, evidence suggests that each of the cultivars
may have appeared earlier in some areas than in others. Nevertheless, with
these caveats in mind, I find this framework useful enough so that I will
follow it in this paper, and apologize in advance for viewing the rest of
South-western Asia through Iranian eyes. The stages are, it should be
emphasized, ones of farming adaptation: they imply nothing about level of
social and political development. They allow, in other words, for the simul¬
taneous existence of tiny four-acre villages in Kurdistan and immense, 32-
acre sites like £atal Huyiik in Anatolia.
  The basic argument of the paper is as follows. An important change in
subsistence pattern, midway through the Upper Palaeolithic in the Near East,
set the stage for domestication of plants. This shift, which represented a
trend toward “broad spectrum” wild resource utilization, continued long
after cultivation had begun. In this sense, our Western view of early cultiva¬
tion as a drastic change or “improvement” in man’s diet is erroneous, as is the
frequently-cited notion that early agriculture gave man a “more stable” food
supply. Given the erratic nature of rainfall in south-west Asia, the era of
early dry-farming was still one of unpredictable surpluses and lean years,
with considerable reliance on local wild products. I suggest that early caprine
domestication, apart from its food aspects, represented a way of “banking”
these unpredictable surpluses in live storage, analogous to the use of pigs by
Melanesian peoples4 or the exchange of imperishable, exotic raw materials
            Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   75


which characterized early village farmers in Mesoamerica5. Early irrigation
modified this pattern, and also aggravated environmental destruction to the
point where the return to a wild resource economy would have been nearly
impossible. It also set the stage for both dramatic population increases in the
lowlands and “ranked” or stratified societies in which a hereditary elite con¬
trolled the small percentage of the landscape on which the bulk of the food
was produced. A bit of indulgence on the reader’s part will be required by the
fact that in a paper of this length only the meagrest documentation can be
offered for these points of view.


         Prime movers and subsistence change


A basic problem in human ecology is why cultures change their modes of
subsistence at all. This paper, while not relying on the facile explanation of
prehistoric environmental change, is hardly destined to settle that problem.
The fact is, however, that for much of South-west Asia we have no evidence to
suggest that late Pleistocene or post-Pleistocene environmental changes forced
any of the significant subsistence shifts seen in the archaeological record. I will
therefore use, as one possible mechanism, a model of population pressure and
disequilibrium relative to environmental carrying capacity, drawn from
recent enthnographic data on hunting and gathering groups.
  A growing body of data supports the conclusion, stated with increasing
frequency in recent years, that starvation is not the principal factor regulating
mammal populations6. Instead, evidence suggests that other mechanisms,
including their own social behaviour, homeostatically maintain mammal
populations at a level below the point at which they would begin to deplete
their own food supply. The recent conference on “Man the Hunter”, held at
Chicago in 1966, made it clear that this is probably also true of human
populations on the hunting-gathering level7. In addition, a number of current
ethnographic studies indicate that, far from being on a starvation level,
hunting-gathering groups may get all the calories they need without even
working very hard8. Even the Bushmen of the relatively desolate Kalahari
region, when subjected to an input-output analysis9, appeared to get 2100
calories a day with less than three days’ worth of foraging per week. Pre¬
sumably, hunter-gatherers in lusher environments in prehistoric times did
even better. This is not to say that palaeolithic populations were not limited
by their food supply; obviously, they were. But in addition, they engaged in
behaviour patterns designed to maintain their density below the starvation
level.
  What, then, would persuade a hunter-gatherer to modify his subsistence
pattern significantly—for example, to adopt agriculture ? In the course of this
paper I would like to apply the equilibrium model recentiy proposed by
Binford10 as a means of explaining post-Pleistocene changes in the archae¬
ological record. This model will be used to offer tentative explanations for
76   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


subsistence changes which took place in the Near East at the three critical
points mentioned in the start of this paper: the Upper Palaeolithic, the
beginning of domestication, and the beginnings of irrigation.
   Binford, drawing on both Birdsell and Wynne-Edwards, postulates that
prehistoric hunting populations, once reasonably well-adapted to a particular
environment, tended to remain stable at a density below the point of resource
exhaustion. He argues that their adaptation would change only in the face of
some disturbance of the equilibrium between population and environment.
Two kinds of disturbances might take place: either (1) a change in the
physical environment which would bring about a reduction in the density of
chosen plant and animal foods, or (2) a change in demography which would
raise local human populations too close to the carrying capacity of the
immediate area. The first kind of disturbance might be reflected in the
palynological record; the second might be reflected in a shift in site density
and settlement pattern in the archaeological record. Disturbances of both
kinds occurred in the prehistoric Near East, but it is perhaps the second kind
which is most useful theoretically, because it does not rely on the deus ex
machina of climatic change, an event which does not seem to have taken place
with sufficient frequency to explain all (or even most) prehistoric cultural
changes11.
   Binford points out that, even in the hunting-gathering era, certain areas
supported higher populations than others because of their high level of edible
resources. Butzer12 makes the same point, singling out the “grassy, tropical
deciduous woodlands and savannas; the mid-latitude grasslands; (and) the
lower latitude Pleistocene tundras” as having the optimal carrying capacity
for hunting-gathering populations. In the case of the Near East, for example,
it would appear that the mixed oak woodland of the Levant Coast supported
higher upper palaeolithic populations than some of the treeless inland steppe
areas, at least where survey has been comparably extensive. One sees, therefore,
a mosaic of “optimal” habitats, with a somewhat higher carrying capacity and
population density, separated by “less favourable” habitats with a somewhat
lower carrying capacity and population density. Binford argues that one source
of stimulus for culture change is the cyclical demographic pressure exerted on
these marginal habitats by their optimal neighbours. It is the optimal habitats
which are regional growth centres; it is in them that populations rise, followed
by buddings-off and emigrations of daughter groups before the carrying
capacity has been strained13. They are the “donor systems”; the marginal
habitats are the “recipient systems”. And it is in the marginal habitats that the
density equilibrium would most likely be periodically disturbed by immigra¬
tions of daughter groups, raising populations too near the limited carrying
capacity. Thus Binford argues that pressures for the exploitation of new food
sources would be felt most strongly around the margins of population growth
centres, not in the centres themselves.
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   77




      The ubroad spectrum” revolution

The first change I would like to deal with took place in the upper palaeolithic
period, before 20,000 B.C., and amounted to a considerable broadening of the
subsistence base to include progressively greater amounts of fish, crabs, water
turtles, molluscs, land snails, partridges, migratory water fowl (and possibly
wild cereal grains in some areas ?).
   The Upper Palaeolithic of the Near East has a number of chronological
phases and regional variants, from the “Antelian” and “Kebaran” of the
Mediterranean Coast14 to the “Baradostian” and “Zarzian” of the Zagros
Mountains15. Its environmental context in the coastal Levant may have been
an open Mediterranean woodland not unlike today’s16, while the Zagros
Mountains seem at that time to have been treeless Artemisia steppe17. In both
areas, hunting of hoofed mammals accounted for 90% of the archaeological
animal bones, and when weights of meat represented are calculated, it appears
that ungulates contributed 99%18. In the Zagros, archaeological settlement
patterns suggest that the basic residential unit was a “base camp” composed
of several families, which shifted seasonally; from this base, hunting parties
made periodic forays to “transitory stations”, vantage points from which they
stalked and eventually killed game, which was then cut up into portable
sections at temporary “butchering stations”19. There are indications that a
similar pattern may have characterized the Levant. On the basis of multi¬
variant factor analysis of flint tools, Binford and Binford20 have described the
various living floors of Rockshelter I at Yabrud as brief “work camps” made
at varying distances from a base camp, sometimes for hunting, sometimes for
processing plant material. Near the Wadi Amelias, where Ksar Akil was
presumably the “base camp”, Ewing21 describes “hunting sites on the
surface higher up in the mountains”, some of which may be analogous to the
transitory stations or butchering stations of the southern Zagros.
   Midway through the “Antelian” or “Baradostian” phases, one can see the
aforementioned trend toward increasing use of small game, fish, turtles,
seasonal water fowl, partridges, and invertebrates—the latter including
terrestrial and marine snails, freshwater mussels, and river crabs. It would be
oversimplified to view this as a “shift from large to small game”, for even at
late palaeolithic sites, ungulates contributed 90% of the meat supply. The
trend is rather from exploiting a more “narrow spectrum” of environmental
resources to a more “broad spectrum” of edible wild products. This “broad
spectrum” collecting pattern characterized all subsequent cultures up to
about 6000 B.C., and I would argue that it is only in such a context that the
first domestication could take place. It is a pattern in which everything from
 land snails (Helix sp.) to very small crabs (Potamon sp.), and perhaps even
 cereal grasses, was viewed as potential food. It was also accompanied by a
 number of “pre-adaptations” for early cultivation.
78   Part I Patterns of exploitation    flannery


    One of these was the development of ground stone technology. At sites like
 Ksar Akil in Lebanon22 and Yafteh Cave in Iran23, small coarse grinding
 stones occasionally appear; abraders are increasingly common in later Zarzian
 sites in the Zagros, where they come to include grooved rubbing stones.24
 Evidence suggests that these implements were at first used mainly (but not
 necessarily solely) for milling ochre. However, the ground stone technology
 was there, and when man eventually turned to the cereal grasses, he had only
 to adapt and expand a pre-existing technology in order to deal with grain
 processing.
    Still another “pre-adaptation” for what was to follow can be detected in the
 later stages of the Palaeolithic in the Near East: the development of storage
 facilities, which are not at all well-represented in earlier phases. In the
 Zarzian level at Shanidar Cave, for example, “several pits . . . which may
 have been storage pits” are reported by Solecki25. These features increase
 with time; many sites of the period 9000-7000 b.c. are reported to have
 subterranean pits, e.g. Zawi Chemi Shanidar26, Karim Shahir27, and
Mureybat28. Some were plastered, evidently for storage, e.g. at Ain Mallaha29,
while others may have been used for roasting grain over heated pebbles, e.g.
at Mureybat30. In any event, these subterranean pits seem to be a feature of
the broad-spectrum collecting era, and would presumably have been more
effective for storing or processing invertebrate or vegetal foods (snails, acorns,
pistachios, etc.) than for any activity connected with ungulate hunting.
    It seems unlikely that the shift to a broad spectrum pattern was a direct
result of environmental change. It is true that the earlier Pleistocene “big
game” of the Near East—elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, and so on—
had vanished, but as pointed out by Howell31, these species disappeared mid¬
way in the Mousterian period, that is, many thousands of years before we can
see any substantial increase in the use of fish, invertebrates, and (possibly)
vegetal foods. Moreover, use of these latter foods is more striking in some
areas than others. For example, in the Levant area none of the Mount Carmel
caves shows much in the way of invertebrate foods32, while “thousands” of
Helix snails are reported from Ksar Akil in the Wadi Amelias33. In the Zagros,
certain caves like Palegawra34 have more abundant remains of snails, mussels,
and crabs than do those in other areas; we recovered virtually no land snails
from our Khorramabad Valley caves35.
   Regional variations like those mentioned above suggest that Binford’s
model of disturbed density equilibrium may not be far wrong: pressure for the
use of invertebrates, fish, water fowl, and previously-ignored plant resources
would have been felt most strongly in the more marginal areas which would
have received overflow from the expanding populations of the prime hunting
zones, raising their densities to the limit of the land’s carrying capacity. At this
point they would tend to turn, I suggest, not to small mammals—which do not
appear to be a very secure resource anywhere in the Near East—but to those
smaller resources which are readily and predictably available in some quantity
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   79


at certain seasons of the year. These are water fowl, fish, mussels, snails, and
plants. Many of these resources are storable, and though small, are not to be
scoffed at. Land snails, for example, although less rich in protein than
ungulate meat, are actually much richer in calcium36, especially in limestone
mountain regions, since they use lime to synthesize their protective mucous37.
Mussels supply vitamin A and acorns and pistachios are very high calorie
foods, much more so than wild game38. Present data tentatively suggest that
the “broad spectrum revolution” was real, that it was nutritionally sound, and
that it originally constituted a move which counteracted disequilibria in
population in the less favourable hunting areas of the Near East. Once
established, however, it spread to and was eventually taken up even by the
favourable areas. And one other aspect of it might be noted: the invertebrate
(and vegetal ?) foods involved are ones which could easily have been collected
by women and children, while the men continued ungulate hunting. The
broad spectrum collecting pattern may therefore have contributed to the
development of division of labour in the late Pleistocene and early post-
Pleistocene era.



      Early dry farming
      The environmental context of early domestication


The “broad spectrum” revolution set the cultural stage for domestication,
and with the close of the Pleistocene the oak woodland belt expanded over the
upland Near East, even into areas of the Zagros which had formerly been tree¬
less steppe39. This “optimum” wild resource zone, which includes the densest
stands of edible nuts, fruits, and wild cereal grasses had apparently been
present in the Levant throughout the last glaciation40, but was now available
over a much wider area.
   A number of environmental characteristics of this zone today (which
presumably have characterized it since the Pleistocene drew to a close) should
be mentioned here, for they are variables which affected man’s use of the
region and set the environmental stage for domestication. Low average
precipitation inhibits dense forest growth, but cool, moist air from the
Mediterranean in winter results in enough rain (or snow) to guarantee some
spring growth of edible grasses and legumes. Hot, dry air circulating out of
Eurasia in the summer (plus even hotter local winds off Arabia) produces a
prolonged rainless period which inhibits the growth of perennials; most of the
vegetation thus consists of annuals which have a peak growing season in
March or April, after which they must be harvested in a three-week period.
This set the seasonal collecting pattern. Further, like most arid or semi-arid
regions, the zone has a low vegetation diversity index41, which means that
certain species (like wild cereal grasses) may form nearly pure stands. This is
8o   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


true of the fauna as well; while the number of mammalian species is low
(relative to wetter areas), many of these are species which tend to form herds,
e.g. sheep, goat, gazelle, and onager. Harlan and Zohary42 have discussed the
implications of the nearly-pure cereal stands, and Reed43 has considered the
pre-adaptive role of “herd behaviour” in the ungulates which were first
domesticated.

      The origins of cultivation


The beginning of cultivation is a second shift which may have taken place in
the less favourable valleys and wadis around the periphery of the zone of
maximum carrying capacity.
   For many years it was assumed, quite logically, that domestication must
have begun in the zone where the wild ancestors of the domesticates are most
at home. Then, in an eye-opening paper, Harlan and Zohary44 revealed that
“over many thousands of hectares” within this zone “it would be possible to
harvest wild wheat today from natural stands almost as dense as a cultivated
wheat field”. Harlan45 then proceeded to do just that: armed with a flint-
bladed sickle, he harvested enough wild wheat in an hour to produce one kilo
of clean grain—and the wild grain, after chemical analysis, proved to be
almost twice as rich in protein as domestic wheat. Harlan and Zohary46 there¬
fore closed with a warning: “Domestication may not have taken place where
the wild cereals were most abundant. Why should anyone cultivate a cereal
where natural stands are as dense as a cultivated field ? . . . farming itself may
have originated in areas adjacent to, rather than in, the regions of greatest
abundance of wild cereals.”
   Harlan’s wild wheat harvest also suggested that a family of experienced
plant-collectors, working over the three-week period when wild wheat comes
ripe, “without even working very hard, could gather more grain than the
family could possibly consume in a year”47. Such a harvest would almost
necessitate some degree of sedentism—after all, where could they go with an
estimated metric ton of clean wheat ?
   This was, of course, what archaeologist Jean Perrot48 had been saying for
years about the Natufian culture in Palestine—that they had been semi-
sedentary, based on intensive wild cereal collection. A further suggestion of
this nature has since come from Tell Mureybat, a site on the terrace of the
Euphrates River in inland Syria, dating to c. 8000 b.c. Preliminary analyses
of carbonized barley and einkorn wheat from pre-pottery levels at the site—
which have clay-walled houses, grinding stones, and roasting pits presumably
used to render the cereal glumes brittle for threshing—suggest that the grain
may be all wild49. Such data indicate that sedentary life based on wild cereal
collecting and hunting may be possible, and that consequentiy pressures for
domestication may not be as strong in the heart of the wild cereal habitat as
elsewhere.
          Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   81


   This impression is reinforced by the fact that some of our most ancient
 samples of morphologically domesticated grain (e.g. emmer wheat) come from
 “marginal” habitats well outside the present wild range of that plant; for
example, in the Wadi Araba region50 and the Khuzistan steppe51, in areas
 where dense stands could only be produced by deliberate cultivation. It is
possible, therefore, that cultivation began as an attempt to produce artificially,
around the margins of the “optimum” zone, stands of cereals as dense as those
in the heart of the “optimum” zone. Binford had already suggested that this
might have taken place in response to population pressure exerted on the
marginal habitats by expansion of sedentary food-collectors from the heart of
the wild cereal zone. It appears that efforts at early cultivation were probably
soon reinforced by favourable mutations in the cereals themselves, such as
toughening of the rachis, polyploidy, and loss of tough glumes.
   The spread of the early dry-farming complex across the Near East is
striking; where surveys are adequate, it appears that very few environmental
zones were without farming communities at this time, although population
densities were higher in some areas than others. In the Zagros Mountains,
densities of sites are highest in intermontane plains with a high sub-surface
water table and frequent marshy areas52, suggesting that a critical resource
sought by early farmers were lands of high water-retention, where soil
moisture helped the planted cereals to survive annual fluctuations in rainfall.
At Ali Kosh on the lowland steppe of south-west Iran, early farmers planted
their cereals so near swamp margins that seeds of club-rush (Scirpus) were
mixed in with the carbonized grain samples53. This is analogous to the
practices of early farmers in parts of arid highland Mesoamerica, who also
utilized permanently-humid bottomlands and high-water table zones54. Such
types of farming may also have facilitated the spread of agriculture out of the
Near East and into Europe, which took place sometime during this time
period.
   More complicated techniques accompanied the extension of early dry¬
farming to its limits in very marginal habitats to the north-east (e.g. the
Turkoman steppe), and the south-west (e.g. the Wadi Araba region). At
Beidha, in the south Jordan desert, it is possible that farming sites were
located in such a way as to take advantage of rainfall run-off concentrated by
steep nearby cliffs56. On the Turkoman steppe, early cultivators used small
“oasis” situations where streams from the Kopet Dagh formed humid deltas
along the base of the mountain range56. In all such cases, where rainfall
agriculture must have been pushed to its absolute limit, barley seems to have
been the main crop57; otherwise, wheat was preferred.

     A detailed look at the early dry-farming diet


In archaeology, one concrete example is often worth more than a whole
chapter of generalization. At this point, I would therefore like to present in
82     Part I Patterns of exploitation         flannery


some detail our dietary data from the site of Ali Kosh, a small early dry¬
farming village on the Khuzistan steppe of south-western Iran58. Excavations
at Ah Kosh produced c. 45,000 carbonized seeds, which on analysis by
Helbaek (n.d.) could be grouped into 40-odd species of plants; it also pro¬
duced more than 10,000 identifiable bones from approximately 35 species of
animals. I have listed only the most common categories in Table 1. In

                             TEPE ALI KOSH (7500-5600 B.c.)
(“'Erruner wheat                                     Caper
(“'Two-row barley, hulled                            Pistachio

(“'(Rare traces of other cultivars)                  Gazelle
                                                     Onager
(“'Goats                                             Pig
(“'Sheep                                             Aurochs

  Small wild legumes (Astragalus, Trigonella,        Fox (and other small mammals)
    Medicago)                                        Miscellaneous birds
  Wild two-row barley                                Ducks and geese
  Goat-face grass (Aegilops)
  Ryegrass (Lolium)                                  Water turtles
  Wild oat grass (Avena)
  Canary grass (Phalaris)                            Fish (carp, catfish)
  Vetchling (Lathyrus)
  Shauk (Prosopis)                                   Freshwater mussels


Table 1      Most common foods recovered in debris at Ali Kosh, an early
        village in the plain of Deh Luran, south-western Iran.(W
     (a) Domesticated items.
     (b) See Helbaek, H. (In press). Plant-collecting, dry-farming, and irrigation agriculture in
         prehistoric Deh Luran, in Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. Prehistory and
         human ecology of the Deh Luran plain, Memoirs, Univ. of Michigan, Museum of
         Anthropology; See Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The prehistory of south¬
         western Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33 (9), pp. 147-206.


addition, I have estimated the pounds of usable meat represented by
minimum individuals of each type of animal, using the system proposed by
White59 and adult weights taken from Walker60 and my own field notes
(Table 2). A further chart (Table 3) gives average representative nutritional
values for some of the important plant and animal foods at the site, taken from
Platt61, plus some estimates of the amount of each food source needed to make
a kilogram.
   Three periods of the early dry-farming era were represented at the site of
Ah Kosh. These have been called the Bus Mordeh (7500-6750 B.c.), Ali Kosh
(6750-6000 b.c.), and Mohammad Jafifar (6000-5600 b.c.) phases62. Counts of
the animal bones and carbonized seeds by species will be given in the final
reports on the site63. I can present here only an abbreviated summary of the
results.
  The subsistence pattern in the earliest, or Bus Mordeh phase, had five
main aspects: (1) the cultivation of cereals, whose grains amounted to only
             Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication                                                                         83



                                                                                                         Tf                         Tf
                      0 i     3 4cd-»                                         in in       rt*        TfCQ      Tt*                  O      a
                                        O    O 0            O O               6 6         6          mom                            6      o
                                        0    in 0           in in                                                                          <D
N _                               g     M                   <N cn   I « I                                                                  Oi
PQ w                 ^       p          M         M                                                                                       V i
                                                                                                                                           d
<        £                                                                                                                                .d
00       d
        *d                                                                                                                                ‘5b
W ft                                                                                                                                      *C
                                                                                                                                           o
ft 33
W es                         ft §       Tf 00 00                                          M     |    w \Q      <S    Tt Tf                 a
                       6 °l
                     • c-H              Tf                                                                                                 >>
                       a d >
                     • ■—1 a ;g                                                                                                           T3
                              a                                                                                                            <u
                                                                                                                                           N



                     *M      0)                                                                                                in
                      O           M                                                                                            M VO
                             O    Co
                                                                      in              M Tf           Tf 00
                                                                                                        ON                  O     in       cd
                      *>1 6             On O O O               O VO   M O             6 6 n ' '                           m 6 6           1
                                                               M N
                     W p G              O in O O
                                        O      CO              N
                                                                      cr> M
                                                                                                         01                                d
                                                                                                                                           cd
13 u
^ 3                                                                                                                                       T3
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                          ,o
-S’ ft                e           -i
                      g°p               O 00
                                             M
                                                  Tj- (N       m (S o m <s            M   M     <S   M   t"-              Tt* cr>          d
                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                          •H
                                                                                                                                           u
                     I si                                                                                                                  cd
                                                                                                                                           >

                                                                                                                             in            <L>
                                                                                                         Tt*              in m m           bD
                     Cm jj                                            in                  00         00 00                N p co           cd
                                                                                                                                           4-*
                      O
                         3        cd
                                  <u
                                        O     O       9        0 VO   cn                             6 6             m    <n   6    6      d
                      hfi cd
                     1 j CO       g
                                        in r^ O
                                        in    M
                                                      0
                                                      tj*
                                                               M <N   M
                                                                                      I 6 I                                                <D
                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                           u
J3                   a d                <s M (S       cs                                                                                   4>
GO
 n                                                                                                                                         a
Oj 00
bz cd                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                            cd
                                                                                                                                           ■M
                                                                                                                                          m<D
                             ft   p
                                        M    On N vo                                                                 ^    mvo             >r3
                             °l
                             6 >
                                        O m m
                                                                           I "I I "I                                 ^ Tj-^vo              (L)
                                                                                                                                          ^d
                             g j-g                                                                                                        +-»

                                a                                                                                                          00
                                                                                                                                           d


                                                                                                        Tj-               in         N     d
                      O      r-H r:
                                                                                                     00 M                 (N        vo     o
                              n cd      m o in O              O                                       6 6      1     n         1     6
X!
                                        ^  O (N O
                                        rs Tt* in <n                       I I I I I I                                                    Vm
<D
T   3                am                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                          T3
O                                                                                                                                          O
%
CO                                                                                                                                         <u
p                            ft §                                                                                                          B
                                        On vo     m co                                                                              CT)
m                    |        °-p       X}- M
                                                                                                                     00   On

                      s      o' >                           I "I "I I I II                                                          M

                             a ;T3
                     §                                                                                                                     ro
                                                                                                                                          VN
                                                                                                                                          ON

                                                                                                                                                      <u
                                                                                                                           in in
                                                                                                                     in in OO
                        . P       iu                                  in      in in w     Tt-        Tt" M     hN N O O                    -r 00I
                      “ s a             in m in o           o o m rt o 6 6 6 6                       M 6 6 6              000
                                                                                                                                           (L)
                     \4 p c             <s   (S
                                                  M
                                                      o in t"- w
                                                      Tf (S
                                                                                                                                          .d vo
                                                                                                                                          *d     on
                                                                                                                                                 ro

                                                                                                                                                      C/5   O
              TP                                                                                                                           (U    p4
               <L)                                                                    9 CO l/N           N           UN vn o        o
              S 33 J3 o                 OOOOOOvoOnO                                   66hm6h666o
              ,Sa PP .SP
                      5i!ti             vr> i/n vn o
                                             O O M Ti¬
                                                ro 00       in m                                                                                 00
                                                                                                                                           cd
              W
                                                                                                                                           3 5
                                                                                                                                           Si
                                                                                                                                          in a
                                                                                                                                           o s
                                                                                                                                          T3 ^
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                          ■s s
                                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                                                                           n 5
84   Part I Patterns of exploitation                                                                                    FLANNERY



                                                                              xi                                         ed cd cd *3.g 13g Id1 co                                    g
                                                                                                                         111 c                   1                                   s
                                                                     WWW d

                                                                    .3 .3 9 CO
                                                                               CO            <u
                                                                                             <D                          Had cd              cds 3 I?                                o
                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                     o3 rt rj
                                                                                             CO
                                                                           r? O
                                                                               3
                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                         w a 1,1 I) 1> tU
                                                                                             O          u
                                                                     be be. -a               O
                                                                                             O
                                                                                                        ko
                                                                                                        bO               <u u <u d a d
                                                                                                                         d d d o o o
                                                                                                                                                        <L> '



                                                                          8O <4H
                                                                           O ^               O
                                                                                                                 0 o         4
                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                                         C*_| C4_| Cm   O
                                                                        o o                  O            o o                     A!              O     h

                                                                                             O            »/■> o 0 0 0 >no o O t) tl -d
                                                                    mmin                                o      o                   n co
                                                                    ro Tf (N                            co N
                                                                                                                         IOIOIONO
                                                                                                                 N N N w N
                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                  VlO-tl


                                                                    -H-H-Hh                  A          A -U -H ti¬                                                  rf- Tt-



                                                        cd o
                                                        4-*
                                                                                                        I I I I I I I I I II I I I                                                   «u
                                                        >u
                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                        'g P                   o o                                                                                                   C   J
                                                        4
                                                        Cd
                                                        -»                     8 °                      I § I I I I I I I I I II                                                     ‘a
                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                        ><                                                                                                                                           N




       Estimated value per kilogram of edible portion
                                                                                                                                                                                                    C/D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cd
                                                        Od o
                                                           bo       In o o
                                                                    m t h ^
                                                                                             o
                                                                                             (N
                                                                                                        OOvovovovoOOOO>oOOO
                                                                                                        ^Tffr>(s<N<smfnm(SMHHMO                                                                     <u
                                                        £ g                                                                                                                                         H


                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                                                                                     C/5

                                                        B                                                                                                                                            O
                                                        3           O     O 0 0              0          0     O O         O   O    O    O    O    O     O       O O      O O         .O
                                                                    O
                                                                    m     vo0 0              0
                                                                                             00         0     O O         M   M    w    O    O    O     O       *n O     O O
                                                        a g               CO        M
                                                                                    M
                                                                                                        VO    Tf
                                                                                                              M M
                                                                                                                              M    M    M    M    M             M O
                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                                         >/*> »/">
                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                     « H
                                                                                             M                                                                                         O


                                                                                                                                                                                      <u
                                                                                                                                                                                     J   3
                                                                                                                                                                                         cd
                                                                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                                                         <L>
                                                                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                     0000                               OOO
                                                                     o    00   onvo                     00    vo rs                                I     I      I    °    I    &
                                                                     r- vo *r\ Tf                       VO    M W                   I   I


                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                                         <U




                                                                     OOOO
                                                                                             »/->
                                                                                                        ^>    00000000000^0
                                                                                                        h-tONOvOvON^tTfTfinhH N (N
                                                            « B      M    N    M    M                                                                                                .Q
                                                        Ph be                                                  1
                                                                                                              </>   /^                  M    M    M     ft")                             cd

                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                     VO
                                                                                                                                                                                      ON



                                                                                                                                                                                     00        Q
                                                            a> ^
                                                                     h
                                                                          O O O
                                                                          n    ct in         81
                                                                                                        0000 O O O O O _O _
                                                                                                        N     O     O VO
                                                                                                                          O O O O
                                                                                                                               r- VO              ■ “
                                                                                                                                        Ov av On Tf On vo                00    O
                                                                                                                                                                                             . 00
                                                            si       l-l M N N               (S         H     N     N H



                                                                                                                                                                                     1*
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pi N
                                                                                                                                                                                     ►> 2>
                                                                                                                                                                                     X) co
                                                              <1>                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                     8 .$>
                                                              •co    O  0
                                                                        On
                                                                               O
                                                                               Ov
                                                                                    O
                                                                                    CO
                                                                                             O
                                                                                             m
                                                                                                         O O O OOO
                                                                                                        00 VO r- vrv On »tn
                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                             <S
                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                  (S
                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                            0 O 0 O
                                                                                                                                                            On On vo O               r-4> >-tX)
                                                                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                     $ CO      CO   ON       CO         00 N >/->       "t              O    O    0         co r- ON
                                                                                                                                                                                     M Co
                                                              13     CO CO     co   (N       CO          co vo VO M M M                 <N   <S   (S     CO w
                                                              U                                                                                                                      cn ^
                                                                                                                                                                                     A! “
                                                                                                                                                                                     2 S
                                                                                                                                                                                     2 §*
                                                                                                                                                  <u
                                                                                                                                                  X                                   d°^
                                                                                                                                                  *-»                                 o ~
                                                                                         X               cd
                                                                                                                                                   8            <u
                                                                                                                                                                a>
                                                                                                                                                                                     T3 'ts
                                                                                                                                                                                          «U

                                                                                                                                                                O                         n r«-
                                                                                    si“J-                                               u XJ                                          PQ to
                                                              Id     cd    >>* >>— PISS’S 5                                    o.rd <L>SP (jo                   CO

                                                                     r;    u   C    W                                                                           (J    £ x
                                                                     k rt i> <3 h                                                       3 3               be 3        3 -
                                                                     ^ PQ _) ^ CO                   £         £^OwOO<P£QHfc^
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   85


about 3% of the carbonized seeds, but because of their greater size constituted
perhaps a third of the total weight of plant food; (2) collecting of small wild
legume seeds of clover-alfalfa type, which constituted about 94% of the
carbonized seeds, but amounted probably to no more than a third of the total
weight of plant food; (3) collecting of the seeds of wild grasses, constituting
only about 1% of the carbonized seeds and about 15% of the weight of plant
food; (4) herding of domestic goats and sheep, whose bones constituted about
67% of the faunal material, but which contributed only about a third of the
total weight of meat represented (see Table 2); (5) hunting of wild ungulates,
which accounted for only 25% of the animal bones, but contributed more
than 60% of the total weight of meat.
   The remainder of the food supply was made up by elements such as nut
meats, fruits, small mammals, fish, water fowl, and mussels, which although
nutritionally important constituted a small percentage of the total weight of
meat and plant food. Unfortunately, in the absence of coprolites, we have no
way of calculating what percentage of the diet was made up by plant foods and
what percentage was meat. It appears, however, that the Bus Mordeh villagers
ate a good deal more meat than the average modern Iranian peasant; Watson64
reports that animal bones are “rather rare” on village dump heaps today.
   Nowadays, as May65 points out, “most Iranian meals are of the one-pot
type”, with many ingredients thrown in, such as grain, lentils, meat, onions,
etc. This may also have been true prehistorically—at least during the later
part of the dry-farming era, when cooking pots are known. The early cereals
(emmer wheat and two-row hulled barley) are largely unsuitable for bread¬
making, and their grains seem to have been pounded up and eaten right along
with fragments of the woody spikelet base66. A lack of scorched or carbonized
bone suggests that most meat was cooked after it had been cut off the carcass,
or else boiled; there is little evidence to indicate direct roasting of the meat
while still on the bone. Thus, it is possible that a typical meal of the early
dry-farming era consisted of a gruel of cereal grains, spikelet bases, wild
legumes, and chunks of ungulate meat cooked up together.
   During the three periods represented at Ali Kosh, the only significant
change in meat resources seems to have been an increase of sheep relative to
goats; hunting was just as important when the site was abandoned as when it
was founded. On the other hand, the changes in plant species percentages
through time are more striking. They reflect (1) increases in cultivated cereal
grains, (2) decreases in the use of local wild legumes, (3) increases in crop
weeds, and (4) increases in plants typical of fallowed agricultural land (see
below). In Tables 2 and 3 I have added comparative data from a nearby
site, Tepe Sabz, which was occupied during the later era of simple irrigation
farming (5500-3700 B.C.).
   In terms of total food supply, hunting and wild plant collecting were not
“supplements” to the Bus Mordeh diet; they were major subsistence
strategies. Most of the total weight of meat and plant foods of this period came
86   Part I Patterns of exploitation   flannery


from wild resources. These resources had been available throughout the
preceding Upper Palaeolithic period, and some of them (e.g. aurochs meat,
pistachios, small wild legumes) are intrinsically richer in calories, protein (or
both) than most of the domestic foods eaten in the Bus Mordeh phase. In this
sense, there is no reason to believe that the early “food-producers” were
significantly better nourished than their “food-collecting” ancestors. Nor was
their subsistence base necessarily more “reliable”; attempts at dry-farming in
the Deh Luran plain today meet with failure two or three years out of every
five67.
   The one real advantage of cereal cultivation is that it increases carrying
capacity of the land in terms of kilograms per hectare. Dry farming of wheat
in northern Khuzistan, for example, yields an average of 410 kilos per
hectare68. This is equal to the weight of usable meat from sixteen sheep, or the
weight of more than 400 million small legume seeds. There is probably no
other food in the Bus Mordeh phase debris which will produce as many kilos
from so small an area as the cereals. Cultivation thus represented a decision
to replace the native, high-protein wild legume ground cover with a lower-
protein grass which would grow more densely and probably was less work to
harvest, in spite of the risk of crop failure.

      Nutritional aspects of early dry-farming in Iran


Still another fact which emerges from an examination of Tables 1-3 is that
the early farmers of south-western Iran were still in the “broad spectrum”
era: they made a living by diversifying their subsistence strategies, rather than
concentrating on one food source. In fact, the synergistic effect of their
various food combinations—ungulate meat, grasses, legumes, nut meats,
mussels and so on—probably resulted in better nutrition than would special¬
ization on a narrower range of products.
   Highest on the fist of calorie-producing foods used at Ali Kosh and Tepe
Sabz were the almonds and pistachios, followed by cereal grasses and wild
legumes. The wild legumes, judging by analyses of Trigonella69, seem to have
been higher in protein than most other food sources. Most calories probably
came from these plant foods, since none of the meat sources (with the possible
exception of pig) has a very high caloric value.
   Minerals like calcium came from a variety of foods: mussels, water turtles,
fresh water crabs, almonds, and pistachios. The mussels, pistachios, and
various of the wild legumes are also good vitamin A sources. (It is interesting
to note, however, that all these calcium-vitamin A sources probably became
insignificant once the milking of domestic animals was established—an event
for which we still have no archaeological evidence.)
   None of the foods fisted in Table 3 is a decent vitamin C source; the fruit
of the wild caper (Capparis) probably filled this role. Other sources existed in
the environment, and probably were used, although it cannot be proved
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   87


archaeologicaUy. These include fresh ungulate liver, the fruit of the jujube
tree (Zizyphus), and the growing shoots of Medicago and other wild legumes70.
In short, combinations of the twenty or so major foods used by the early dry
farmers probably left them far better nourished than today’s Iranian villager.71

     Cropping, herding and erratic rainfall in the dry-farming era


One aspect of dry-farming in western Iran—or elsewhere in the Near East,
for that matter—is that its outcome is unpredictable. Our figure of 410 kilos
per hectare for northern Khuzistan is an average; in a good year the yield
might be 1000 kilos, in a bad year almost nothing.
   We have already mentioned the hazards of dry-farming in the Deh Luran
plain. Watson72 gives roughly similar figures for Iranian Kurdistan, where
annual rainfall is higher (but still erratic). There a farmer may plant 300
kilos of wheat, and if the rain comes on time and in sufficient amounts, he
might even get a ten-fold yield (3000 kilos). On the other hand, Watson’s
informants lost their entire wheat crop in 1958, 1959, and i960 because of
insects. What early farmers needed, therefore, was a way of levelling out the
years of unpredictable bumper crops.
   Primitive peoples, in the prehistoric record and in the ethnographic
present, seem to use three main methods for dealing with unpredictable
surpluses. They can store them; they can convert them into craft items of
imperishable, exotic raw materials, which can be used as media of exchange
during lean years73; or they can convert them into live storage, i.e. domestic
animals, which can be used either directly (as food) or for inter-group ex¬
changes which set up reciprocal obligations and maximize sharing during lean
years74. These second two alternatives amount to a kind of “banking” of
surpluses75.
   While early farmers in Mesoamerica relied fairly heavily on exchanges of
exotic raw materials76, the early Near Eastern farmers seem to have used
mainly storage and domestic animals. Sheep and goats, for example, may be
purchased with agricultural surpluses in good years, then exchanged for grain
in lean years. They may be allowed to graze on growing cereal grain fields in
good years77, and at some time periods were fed stored or surplus barley78.
Archaeological and ethnographic evidence suggest that plant cultivation and
animal herding, far from being two separate subsistence activities, are inter¬
related in ways which help “bank” surpluses and even out the erratic fluctua¬
tions of the Near Eastern environment.

      Effects of early cultivation on the wild plant cover


One effect of cultivation was an extensive alteration of the native plant cover
of areas like the south-west Iranian steppe, which may actually have prevented
a return to previous food-gathering patterns.
88   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


   We have mentioned already the heavy dependence of Bus Mordeh phase
farmers on local wild plants between 7500 and 6750 b.c. Nine-tenths of the
seeds identified by Helbaek from these levels were from small annual legumes
and wild grasses native to northern Khuzistan. Most abundant were the
clover-like legumes Medicago (wild alfalfa). Astragalus (spiny milk vetch), and
Trigonella (a small plant of the pea family, related to fenugreek); but they also
collected oat grass (Avena), Bermuda grass (Cynodon) and Canary grass
('Phalaris). However, these wild plants have the same general growing season
as wheat and barley, which the Bus Mordeh people cultivated, and they also
compete for the same alluvial soil with low salinity which the cereals require.
As cultivation of wheat and barley increased, therefore, these wild legumes
and grasses assumed the status of weeds, and were removed to make way for
cultivated grains.
   Their place did not remain unfilled for long, however—what happened was
that new crop weeds from the mountains were introduced, probably in
imperfectly cleaned batches of grain brought down to the steppe. These
included various strains of Aegilops (goat-face grass), Lolium (ryegrass), and
other grasses. Once established, the newcomers proved stubborn; Adams79
reports that today ryegrass is one of the major crop weeds requiring eradica¬
tion in the Mesopotamian lowlands.
   One of the native plants which did not compete with the cereal crops was
Prosopis, a woody perennial legume with an edible pod, related to the
mesquite plant of the American West. Adams points out that Prosopis
matures in a different season of the year from the cereals, and its deep root
system survives even after ploughing. This woody wild legume may therefore
even increase along with cultivation and fallow land, and Helbaek has in fact
detected an increase in Prosopis seeds through time through three periods at
Ali Kosh. Evidently the early cultivators responded in a reasonable way: as
Prosopis increased, they ate more of it.
   Fallowing practices also modified the landscape in other ways. Today in
Khuzistan, three-fourths of all arable land is fallow during any given year.
Helbaek’s study of carbonized seeds from the Mohammad Jaffar Phase at Ah
Kosh indicate that by c. 6000 b.c. such fallowing systems were already
taking their toll of the previously dominant grasses and legumes, which were
increasingly being replaced by pasture plants like mallow (Malva), plantain
(Plantago), fumitory (Fumaria) and bedstraw {Galium).
   The tiny annual legumes retreated to the margins of the cultivated land
and the talus slope of the mountains. Their role as a major human food was
played out by 6000 b.c. But they were not forgotten or ignored; they became
food for sheep and goats. Today, from Iran west across the Near East, and
even as far as the Tuareg Country of North Africa80, Astragalus and Trigonella
have become two of the most common plants collected as fodder for domestic
caprines. Man continues to derive energy from them, but through an animal
converter.
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication     89




      Early irrigation farming

      Origins of irrigation


Irrigation may be yet a third example of an innovation which took place in a
less-favourable habitat adjacent to an area of population growth. Our earliest
evidence for this new technology comes not from the well-watered uplands of
Kurdistan and Luristan, where early dry-farming was so successful, but from
the lowland steppe of Khuzistan, a treeless plain receiving only 300 mm. of
annual rainfall.
   There is some reason to believe that the Khuzistan steppe was, indeed,
receiving overflow populations from the mountain woodland. One line of
evidence is the aforementioned field weeds in early levels at Ali Kosh—
including Aegilops and Lolium, which are more at home in the mountains than
on the steppe. The implication is that the whole complex, both cereals and
field weeds, came into the steppe from the uplands. Another line of evidence
is the strong resemblance of steppe artifact assemblages to those in the
mountains81.
   Although survey has been far from exhaustive, what we know of the
Zagros region at that time does suggest that population densities were higher
in the large intermontane valleys than on the steppe82. Under conditions of
rainfall agriculture, the carrying capacity of the steppe is limited, soil salinity
is an ever-present danger, and considerable fallowing is required. Parts of
the steppe, however, had great potential for irrigation: areas like the upper
Khuzistan plains, where “increased surface gradients and widespread under¬
lying gravel deposits provide sufficient natural drainage ... to minimize the
problems of salinization and waterlogging that usually attend irrigation
agriculture”83. Once irrigation appeared, the steppe greatly increased its
carrying capacity and became, in fact, the dominant growth centre of the
Zagros region between 5500 and 4000 b.c. Yet, interestingly enough, this new
mode of production did not spread rapidly out of south-west Asia as earlier
systems of dry-farming had: it seems to have been a peculiarly Near Eastern
development.
 - Early irrigation on the lowland steppe was accompanied by a shift in
settlement pattern84. Instead of locating sites near the margins of swampy
areas, where the high water table could be used to ameliorate fluctuations in
rainfall, some villages now occurred in linear arrangements along fossil
stream courses from which water could be drawn by small, shallow canals.
Table 4 fists the major plant and animal food sources from Tepe Sabz, an
early irrigation site in south-western Iran.
   Archaeological evidence for early irrigation comes from a variety of
approaches. It was Adams85 who first pointed out that there were alignments
of later prehistoric sites in Khuzistan (5500-3500 b.c.) which seemed to
90    Part I Patterns of exploitation       flannery


                               TEPE SABZ (5500-3700 b.c.)

(“'Emmer wheat                                    Shauk (Prosopis)
<“'Two-row barley, hulled                         Caper
(“'Bread wheat                                    Pistachio
(“'Einkorn wheat                                  Almond
(“'Six-row barley, hulled
<“> Six-row barley, naked                         Gazelle
(“'Linseed                                        Onager
(°) Lentils                                       Pig
(“'Grass peas

(“'Goats                                          Fox (and other small mammals)
(“'Sheep                                          Miscellaneous birds
(“'Cattle

  Goat-face grass (Aegilops)                      Water turtles
  Ryegrass (Lolium)
  Vetchling {Lathyrus)                            Fish


Table 4. Common foods recovered from Tepe Sabz, in the plain of Deh
            Luran, south-west Iran.16)
 (a) (Domesticated items.
 (b) See Helbaek, H. (In press). Plant-collecting, dry-farming, and irrigation agriculture in
      prehistoric Deh Luran, in Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. Prehistory and
      human ecology of the Deh Luran plain, Memoirs Univ. of Michigan, Museum
      of Anthropology.


follow such water courses south into the zone where rainfall alone is in¬
adequate for cultivation. Implications of the settlement pattern were that
irrigation, consisting of the simple breaching of the natural levees of small
streams flowing at the surface of the plain, enabled prehistoric farmers to
partially counteract the erratic and frequently inadequate rainfall of the
steppe. A similar survey by Wright86, recently undertaken in the vicinity of
Ur, shows that Ubaid baked-clay sickles and sickle fragments found on the
land surface tend to be restricted to a band five kilometres wide to either side
of fossil stream channels, giving us an estimate of the area watered by the
small canals serving the fields.

      Ecological effects of irrigation


Irrigation in Khuzistan, according to Adams87 tends to increase crop yields
from 410 kilos per hectare to 615 kilos per hectare. In addition, the actual
physical size of the crop plants themselves seems to have been increased. For
example, Helbaek’s studies suggest that seeds of flax or linseed (Linum
bienne) grown by rainfall alone have a maximum length range between
3-29-4-03 mm., while irrigated flax has a maximum length range of 4-39-6-20
mm. Flax seeds of this large size do not appear in the Deh Luran deposits
until 5500-5000 B.c., after which they are present in large numbers88.
However, as many authors have already pointed out, irrigation if unaccom¬
panied by proper drainage may bring salt to the surface through capillary
action in areas which were not previously saline. Agriculture then necessitates
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   91


a strategy in which the advantages of irrigation water are weighed against soil
salinity. One strategy employed in the lowlands of Iran and Mesopotamia was
to concentrate on barley, which has a shorter growing season and higher salt
tolerance than wheat. It is no accident that barley and sheep (see below), with
their relatively greater ability to withstand the rigours of the hot, dry, saline
lowland steppe and alluvium, were among the most important food resources
of Elamite civilization89.
   One by-product of irrigation was that the canal became a new semihumid
niche on which specialized plants could be grown, apart from those which the
water was originally intended to irrigate. It is known, for example, that
onions and date palms were grown on canal banks in early historic times in
Mesopotamia90. Unfortunately, the canal vegetation is also served as a haven
for crop pests such as the bandicoot-rat (Nesokia indica) which otherwise
would have been less abundant in the region.

      Sheep versus Stipa: a by-product of the origins of wool


An interesting chain of events followed the domestication of Ovis orientalis, an
animal which still roams the foothills and intermontane plains of the Zagros
and Taurus ranges in herds of up to fifteen individuals. These sheep have a
coat which is reddish-buff above, white below, and is little different from that
of a deer or gazelle. The coat is composed of hair from two kinds of follicles:
“primaries”, which produce the visible coat, and “secondaries”, which pro¬
duce the hidden, woolly underfur91.
   In the wild, these sheep use a number of wild grasses as forage. One of the
best of these is a plant known as Stipa, or “feathergrass”, which grows over
much of the area from the Khuzistan and Assyrian steppes to the high
mountains of the Iran-Iraq border. Many species of Stipa are classed by
Pabot92 and others as among the better forage species in terms of nutrition.
Stipa has a rather interesting seed implantation mechanism: the seed has a
sharp callus, which easily penetrates the soil, and a number of short stiff hairs
which oppose its withdrawal. The bent and twisted awn of the seed, which is
hygroscopic, serves as a driving organ, twisting and untwisting with changes
in humidity. Thus, over a period of alternating wet and dry days, the feather¬
grass seed literally “screws itself into the ground”.
   Now, to set the stage, let us domesticate Ovis orientalis in the Zagros area
sometime between 9000 and 8000 b.c. It appears (at the present state of our
knowledge) that the first genetic change following domestication was the
loss of horns in some sheep, probably females. One hornless sheep specimen
is known from the Bus Mordeh phase in the Deh Luran plain of Iran,
dating to about 7500 b.c.93, and others are known from early villages near
Kermanshah, Iran and in Anatolia94. A later change, and one still not radio¬
carbon dated95, was the appearance of wool in domestic sheep, which we
know took place prior to 3000 b.c.96 Ryder97 has shown that this was brought
92   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


about when the “secondary” follicles increased in number and changed their
spacing, causing the “underfur” to become the principal component of the
sheep’s coat.
   It has long been known that sheep survive high temperatures and desertic
conditions better than most other domestic animals. Recent studies by
Schmidt-Nielsen98 and his associates suggest that this is due to a number of
factors: a “panting” mechanism which “permits an efficient ventilation of the
upper respiratory tract, where most of the evaporation takes place”99 and also
—believe it or not—their wool. Thermometers were used to measure the
internal, skin-surface, and outer-wool temperatures of sheep exposed to
extreme conditions of heat and sun. It was observed that while the wool
temperature reached 87°C, skin temperature remained at 42°C; in other
words, “4 cm. of wool sustained a gradient of 45°C between tip and skin”100.
It appears that while wool acts not only as a reflection to divert light and heat
rays, but also as a layer of insulation which allows air circulation to cool the
skin without exposing it to the sun. There may thus be some adaptive
advantage for woolliness in domestic sheep maintained in captivity in hot
climates, especially if they are deprived of a chance to spend the mid-day
hours in the shade of a thicket, as they do in the wild. (Obviously, however,
the extreme degree of woolliness in modern breeds is an artificial condition
maintained by man, since feral sheep rapidly lose it.)
   One of the side-effects of this process becomes apparent when woolly sheep
are allowed to graze in meadows of Stipa: the feathergrass seed catches in the
wool and often, through the same process of wetting and drying with which it
plants itself, may burrow right into the animal’s skin, causing considerable
discomfort and even infection101. In some parts of Iran today, for example,
shepherds even avoid taking their flocks into areas dominated by this plant102,
which must have been one of the most useful foods of the hairy wild sheep.
Such little ecological chains of events give us some idea of how complex the
whole process of domestication must have been.

     Effects of changing land-use on sociopolitical structure


An interesting relationship appears when one plots the increasing population
of prehistoric Iran against today’s figures for different kinds of land use, as I
have done in Table 5. It would appear that while early dry-farming and
irrigation were pushing population densities up at a rapid rate, the relative
amount of land which could be considered “prime”, or “highly productive”
was decreasing with equal rapidity. Let me explain.
   Hole and I103 have already presented estimates of population densities for
parts of south-western Iran during the prehistoric era. These estimates are
based on numbers of sites recovered by our surveys and those of Adams104,
using figures of approximately 100 persons per 1-hectare village site, and so
on; it is presumed that whatever inaccuracies are present apply equally to all
             Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   93


    O'




         %




                PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL LAND SURFACE TO WHICH
                "MOST-PRODUCT!VE"TECHNIQUE CAN BE APPLIED

Table 5  Inverse ratio between population growth and percentage of total
     land surface to which “most productive” technique (hunting-gathering,
     dry-farming, early irrigation) could be applied at various stages of
     Iranian prehistory.

periods, so the general shape of the population growth curve should be reason¬
ably reliable. Briefly, our estimates go from o-1 persons per square kilometre in
the late Palaeolithic, to 1-2 persons per square kilometre under conditions of
early dry-farming, and up to 6 or more persons per square kilometre after
irrigation appears in the archaeological record. In other words, population
increased at least sixty-fold in the space of about six thousand years.
   Now consider the figures given by May105, which are based on the 1956
94   Part I Patterns of exploitation   flannery


Iranian Census, plus studies by FAO-WHO and the U.S. Foreign Agricul¬
tural Service. First of all, these studies indicate that a very large part of Iran—
about 65%—is taken up by nearly uninhabitable deserts and lands of ex¬
tremely marginal productivity. These may have been used by late Palaeolithic
man, but surely it would have been the other 35% which provided him with
the best hunting-gathering opportunities; included in the latter would be the
intermontane plains of the limestone mountain area and the great winter
grasslands of northern Khuzistan. These zones had the wild game, as well as
the edible fruits, grasses, and legumes which supplied its sustenance and
presumably also man’s.
   Begin dry-farming, however, and the picture changes; for only 10% of
Iran’s land surface is considered “arable”106. This means that although
population increased by twenty times, most of its food was now produced on
one-tenth of the land surface. And with the start of irrigation the ratio changed
drastically again; today, only 10% of the arable land in Iran, or 1% of the
total land surface, is irrigated (and that includes large areas irrigated today by
underground chain wells or qanats, for which we have no evidence in pre¬
history; the area over which stream or canal irrigation can be practised is even
smaller). Add to this the fact that in any one year three out of every four
hectares of arable land are fallow, and it appears that a very small area feeds
many millions of people. In fact, the irrigated 1% of the country produces
30% of the yearly crop107.
   Such an inverse ratio between population and “most productive” land
characterized other areas where early civilizations arose—Mesoamerica, for
example. As Palerm and Wolf108 have suggested, early agriculture in Mexico
and Guatemala probably depended on rainfall alone; but as time went by,
increasingly more productive techniques arose, such as flood-water farming,
canal irrigation, dams, and chinampas or “floating gardens”. As these tech¬
niques appeared they were “applicable to an ever-decreasing number of
areas”109. The area over which the most productive techniques could be
applied was miniscule relative to Mesoamerica as a whole—yet such areas fed
millions of Indians.
   Perhaps the most important consequence of the inverse ratio is that it set
the stage for social stratification. As May110 has pointed out, one of the salient
characteristics of Near Eastern agriculture is what he politely calls “inequit¬
able systems of land ownership and tenure”. It is not just that 100% of the
food is produced on 10% of the land; it is the fact that in some cases 1% of the
population owns the 1% of the land which produces 30% of the food. This
kind of differential access to strategic resources, including the means of
production, is at the heart of “ranked” or “stratified” society. It is not a
result of agricultural success, or “surplus”, but a product of the widening gap
between the size of the population and the size of the critical land surface on
which it was most dependent. It is probably no accident that highly stratified
societies followed this adaptive era in the alluvial lowlands of the Near East.
           Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication    95



       Conclusions

  Like many semi-arid mountain regions, the Near East is a mosaic of woodland
  or parkland areas, relatively rich in wild products, surrounded by steppes or
  grasslands which are less rich in wild products. The changes leading to
  intensive food production are here viewed as a series of responses to dis¬
  turbances of density equilibrium in human populations around the margins
  of the favoured areas, caused by the fact that those areas were the zones of
  population growth and emigration. Obviously, a definition of “favourable”
  depends on the technological level at the time: i.e. hunting, wild plant
" collecting, early dry-farming, or early irrigation.
      Recent ethnographic studies do not indicate that hunters and gatherers are
  “starving”, or that starvation is the major factor limiting their populations.
  Nor does the archaeological record in the Near East suggest that the average
  Neolithic farmer was any better nourished than the average Palaeolithic hunter.
  Moreover, over much of the Near East, farming does not necessarily con¬
 stitute a “more stable” subsistence base or a “more reliable” food supply.
  The real consequence of domesticati on was to (1) change the means of pro¬
 duction in society, (2) make possible divisions of labour not usually character¬
 istic of hunter-gatherers, and (3) lay the foundations for social stratification by
 continually reducing the zone of “optimum” productivity while allowing the
 population to expand at a geometric rate. It also (4) increased man’s potential
 for environmental destruction, so that eventually it would have been im¬
 possible for him to return to his former means of subsistence, had he wanted
 to.
     In this respect, early Near Eastern agriculture represents yet another
 example of the “second cyberneti cs”111. Starting with a relatively stable con¬
 figuration of plant and animal species at 10,000 B.C., early cultivation took
 two genera of cereal grasses and two genera of small ungulates out of their
 habitat and artificially increased their numbers while they underwent a
 series of genetic changes, many of which were favourable from man’s stand¬
 point. These favourable changes made feasible a still greater investment of
 human labour in the cereals and caprines, and a greater artificial expansion of
 their range at the expense of other species. At th is point, the ecosystem was no
 longer cybemating, or “stable”; all former rules which had kept species in
 check were off. What had been a minor deviati on from equilibrium at 8000
 b.c. had been amplified into a major subsystem at 5000 b.c., by which time
 irrigation had been employed to produce single-species stands of cereals where
 none had even existed in the wild. When equilibrium was momentarily
 reached again, perhaps around the time of the Sumeri an state, a great many
 species—like the aurochs, the onager, and the red deer— had been driven com¬
 pletely on to marginal land. Today they are locally or u niversally extinct in the
 Near East. The new niches opened up by agriculture and irrigation were not
96   Part I Patterns of exploitation    FLANNERY


for them, but for the crop pests and weeds which accompanied the cereals into
foreign habitats and became, in some cases, part of the dominant biota. So
great was the change in the Near East that today we see its original con¬
figuration only in the pollen record and the Palaeolithic bone debris.




      Notes
       1 Lees, G. M. and Falcon, N. L. (1952). The geographical history of the
         Mesopotamian plains, Geog.J., 118, pp. 24-39.
       2 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The prehistory of south-western
         Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33 (9), pp. 147-206.
       3 Adams, R. M. (1962). Agriculture and urban life in early south-western
         Iran, Science, 136, p. 114.
       4 Lees, S. H. (1967). Regional integration of pig husbandry in the New
         Guinea highlands, Paper presented at the Michigan Academy of Sciences,
         Annual Meeting J967.
       5 Flannery, K. V. (1968). The Olmex and the Valley of Oaxaca: a model
         for inter-regional interaction in Formative times, Conference on the Olmec,
         Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, D.C., 27th October 1967.
       6 Wynne-Edwards, C. V. (1962). Animal Dispersion in relation to Social
         Behaviour. Edinburgh.
       7 Birdsell, J. B. (1966). Some predictions for the Pleistocene based upon
         equilibrium systems among recent hunters, Statement for conference,
         “Man the Hunter”, University of Chicago, 6-9th April 1966.
       8 McCarthy, F. D. (1957). Habitat, economy, and equipment of the
         Australian Aborigines, Aus. J. of Sci., 19, pp. 88-97; Bose, S. (1964).
         Economy of the Onge of Little Andaman, Man in India, 44 (4), pp. 298-
         310, Calcutta; Lee, R. B. (1965). Subsistence ecology of !Kung Bushman.
         Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
       9 Lee, R. B. (In press). !Kung Bushmen subsistence: an input-output
         analysis. To appear in Vayda, A. P. (ed.) Human Ecology: an anthropo¬
         logical reader, American Museum of Natural History.
      10 Binford, L. R. (1968). Post-Pleistocene adaptations in Binford L. R. and
         Binford, S. R. (eds.) New Perspectives in Archaeology, Chicago.
      11 Binford, L. R. (1968). ibid.
      12 Butzer, K. W. (1964). Environment and Archeology: an introduction to
         Pleistocene geography. Chicago.
      13 Birdsell, J. B. (1957). Some population problems involving Pleistocene
         man. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 22. The
         Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, pp. 47-69.
      14 Howell, F. C. (1959). Upper Pleistocene stratigraphy and early man in the
         Levant, Proc. of the American Phil. Soc., 103, (1), pp. 1-65.
      15 Solecki, R. S. (1964). Shanidar Cave, a late Pleistocene site in northern
         Iraq, Rep. of the Vlth Inter. Congress on the Quaternary, 4, pp. 413-23.
      16 Rossignol, M. (1962). Analyse pollinique de sediments marins Quatern-
         aires en Israel, II—Sediments Pleistocenes, Pollen et Spores, 4 (1), pp.
          121-48; Rossignol, M. (1963). Analyse pollinique de sediments Quatern-
          aires dans la plaine de Haifa, Israel, Israel J. of Earth Sciences, 12, pp.
          207-14.
      17 van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E., Jr. (1963). Preliminary pollen studies at
          Lake Zeribar, Zagros Mountains, south-western Iran, Science, 140, pp.
          65-9; van Zeist, W. (1967). Late Quaternary vegetation hustory of
          western Iran, Rev. of Palaeobot. and Palynol., 2, pp. 301-11.
    Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication        97

18 Flannery, K. V. (1965). The ecology of early food production in Mesopo¬
   tamia, Science, 147, pp. 1247-56.
19 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
20 Binford, L. R. and Binford, S. R. (1966). A preliminary analysis of
   functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies, Amer. Anthrop.,
   68 (2, part 2), pp. 238-95.
21 Ewing, J. F. (1949). The treasures of Ksar ’Akil, Thought, 24, Fordham
   University, p. 276.
22 Ewing, J. F. (1951). Comments on the report of Dr. H. E. Wright, Jr., on
   his study of Lebanese marine terraces, J. of Near Eastern Studies, 10, p. 120.
23 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
24 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.; Garrod, D. A. E. (1930). The
   Palaeolithic of southern Kurdistan: excavations in the caves of Zarzi and
   Hazar Merd., Bull, of the American School of Prehistoric Research, 6, pp.
   9 43
    -   -

25 Solecki, R. S. (1964). op. cit. p. 417; Solecki, R. L. (1964). Zawi Chemi
   Shanidar, a post-Pleistocene village site in northern Iraq, Rep. of the Vlth
   Inter. Congress on the Quaternary, 4, pp. 405-12.
26 Solecki, R. S. (1964). ibid.; Solecki, R. L. (1964). ibid.
27 Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960). Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
   Kurdistan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, Oriental Institute,
   Chicago, 31.
28 van Loon, M. (1966). Mureybat: an early village in inland Syria, Archae¬
   ology, 19, pp. 215-16.
29 Perrot, J. (1966). Le gisement Natufien de Mallaha (Eynan), Israel,
   VAnthropologie, 70 (5-6), pp. 437-84.
30 Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960), ibid.
31 Howell, F. C. (1959). op. cit. table 10.
32 Garrod, D. A. E. and Bate, D. M. A. (1937). The Stone Age of Mt. Carmel:
   excavations at the Wadi el-Mughara, I. Oxford.
33 Ewing, J. F. (1949). op. cit. p. 262.
34 Reed, C. A. and Braidwood, R. J. (i960). Towards the reconstruction of
   the environmental sequence in north-eastern Iraq, in Braidwood, R. J.
   and Howe, B. op. cit. p. 169.
35 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
36 Platt, B. S. (1962). Tables of representative values of foods commonly
   used in tropical countries. Medical Research Council, Special Report
   Series, 302, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
37 Hesse, R., Allee, W. C. and Schmidt, K. P. (1951). Ecological Animal
   Geography. New York.
38 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.
39 van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E. (1963). ibid.
40 Rossignol, M. (1962). ibid.; Rossignol, M. (1963). ibid.
41 Odum, E. P. and Odum, H. T. (1959). Fundamentals of Ecology, 2nd ed.
   Philadelphia, p. 281.
42 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and
   barley. Science, 153, pp. 1075-80.
43 Reed, C. A. (1959). Animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
   Science, 130, pp. 1629-39; Reed, C. A. (i960). A review of the archae¬
   ological evidence on animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
   in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. op. cit. pp. 119-46.
44 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). op. cit. p. 1078.
45 Harlan, J. R. (1967). A wild wheat harvest in Turkey, Archaeology, 20 (3),
   pp. 197-201.
46 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
47 Harlan, J. R. (1967). op. cit. p. 198.
48 Perrot, J. (1966). op. cit. pp. 480-3.
98   Part I Patterns of exploitation    Flannery


     49 van Loon, M. (1966). ibid.
     50 Kirkbride, D. (1966). Five seasons at the pre-pottery Neolithic village of
        Beidha in Jordan, Palestine Exploration Quarterly, 98 (1), pp. 8-72.
     51 Helbaek, H. (In press). Plant-collecting, dry-farming, and irrigation
        agriculture in prehistoric Deh Luran, in Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and
        Neely, J. A. Prehistory and human ecology of the Deh Luran plain,
        Memoirs, Univ. of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology.
     52 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
     53 Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.
     54 Flannery, K. V., Kirkby, A. V., Kirkby, M. J. and Williams, A. W., Jr.
        (1967). Farming systems and political growth in ancient Oaxaca, Science,
        158, pp. 445-54.
     55 Kirkbride, D. (1966). ibid.
     56 Masson, V. M. (1965). The Neolithic farmers of Central Asia, Acts, VI
        Inter. Congress of Pre- and Proto-historic Sciences, 2, pp. 205-15.
     57 Helbaek, H. (1966). Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and
        Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20, pp. 350-60; Helbaek, H. (1966). Pre-pottery
        Neolithic farming at Beidha, in Kirkbride, D. Five seasons at the pre¬
        pottery Neolithic village of Beidha in Jordan, Palestine Exploration
        Quarterly, 98 (1), pp. 61-6; Masson, V. M. (1965). ibid.
     58 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
     59 White, T. (1953). A method of calculating the dietary percentage of
        various food animals utilised by aboriginal peoples, American Antiquity,
        18 (4), pp. 396-8.
     60 Walker, E. P. (1964). Mammals of the World. Baltimore.
     61 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.; Obvious difficulties were encountered in finding
        values for some of the wild foods at Ali Kosh. For gazelle meat, I have used
        the values for lean goat meat; for onager, those for lean beef. Small legume
        values are those given for fenugreek (Trigonella sp.), etc.
     62 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
     63 Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.; Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A.
        (In press), ibid.
     64 Watson, P. J. (1966). Clues to Iranian prehistory in modern village life.
        Expedition, 8 (3), p. 13.
     65 May, J. M. (1961). The Ecology of Malnutrition in the Far and Near East.
        New York. p. 370.
     66 Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.
     67 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). op. cit. footnote 6.
     68 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit. p. no.
     69 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.
     70 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.
     71 May, J. M. (1961). op. cit. p. 373; the synergistic value of food combina¬
        tions was brought home to me in 1963 while I worked closely in the field
        with my friend and colleague, Frank Hole, excavating the paleolithic
        caves of Iran’s Khorramabad Valley. As we sat in our camp in the evening
        —partaking of barley in its most appealing form—we used to share a
        large paper sack of Kurdistan pistachios (Pistacia atlantica). Wild products
        being what they are, the 1963 pistachio crop was riddled with small live
        caterpillars which had bored into the nuts and lay waiting for the unwary
        eater. I examined each pistachio carefully as I opened it, and as a con¬
        sequence had to discard about half; but I noticed that Hole was able to
        eat 100% of the ones he selected, and I commented on his luck. To
        which he replied: “I’m just not looking.” I later learned that a kilo of
        dried caterpillars may contain 3720 calories, 550 grams of protein, 2700
        milligrams of calcium, and a generous supply of thiamine, riboflavin, and
        iron (see Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.). In fact, the protein content is double
        that of the pistachios themselves, and a combination of the two foods
     Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication      99

    probably has a synergistic effect exceeding the value of the nuts alone.
    Hole’s wise decision to diversify his subsistence base brought him out of
    the field season a good thirty pounds heavier than me.
 72 Watson, P. J. (1966). ibid.
 73 Harding, T. G. (1967). Voyagers of the Vitiaz Strait: a study of a New
    Guinea trade system. Seattle; Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
 74 Lees, G. M. (1967). ibid.; Rappaport, R. A. (1967). Ritual regulation of
    environmental relations among a New Guinea people, Ethnology, 6 (1),
    pp. 17-30.
 75 Lees, S. H. (1967). ibid.
 76 Flannery, K. V. (In press), ibid.
 77 Adams, R. M. (1965). Land behind Baghdad: a history of settlement on the
    Diyala plains. Chicago, p. 14.
 78 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit. p. 115.
 79 Adams, R. M. (1965). op. cit. p. 5.
 80 Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and culture of the pastoral Tuareg, National-
    museets Skrifter, 9, Copenhagen.
 81 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. (In press), ibid.
 82 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
 83 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit. p. no.
 84 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. (In press), ibid.
 85 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit.
 86 Wright, H. T. (1967). The administration of rural production in an early
    Mesopotamian town. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Chicago, pp. 38-9.
 87 Adams, R. M. (1962). ibid.
 88 Helbaek, H. (i960). The paleoethnobotany of the Near East and Europe,
    in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960), op. cit. pp. 99-118; Helbaek,
    H. (i960). Ecological effects of irrigation in ancient Mesopotamia, Iraq,
    22, pp. 186-96; Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.
 89 Adams, R. M. (1962). ibid.; Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
 90 Adams, R. M. (i960). Early civilizations: subsistence and environment,
    in Kraeling, C. H. and Adams, R. M. (eds.) City Invincible: a symposium
    on urbanization and cultural development in the ancient Near East. Chicago,
    pp. 269-95.
 91 Ryder, M. L. (1958). Follicle arrangement in skin from wild sheep,
    primitive domestic sheep and in parchment, Nature, Lond. 182, pp. 781-3.
 92 Pabot, H. (i960). The Native Vegetation and its Ecology in the Khuzistan
    River Basins. Khuzistan Development Service, Ahwaz, Iran.
 93 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). op. cit. fig. 8.
 94 Personal communication from S. Bokonyi and D. Perkins, Jr.
 95 Textiles from £atal Hiiyiik, once thought to be perhaps the earliest wool
    know, have been examined now by Ryder, M. L. (1965). Report of textiles
    from £atal Hiiyuk, Anatolian Studies, 15, pp. 175-6, and it appears that
    they are mostly flax fibre.
 96 Hilzheimer, M. (1941). Animal remains from Tell Asmar, Studies in
    Ancient Oriental Civilization, 20, Univ. of Chicago, Oriental Institute.
 97 Ryder, M. L. (1958), ibid.
 98 Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1964). Desert Animals: physiological problems of heat
    and water. Oxford.
 99 Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1964). op. cit. p. 99.
100 Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1964). op. cit. p. 97.
101 Reeder, J. R. (1967). Grasses, Encyclopedia Britannica, 1967 edition, 10,
    p. 700.
102 Pabot, H. (i960), ibid.
103 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
104 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit.
105 May, J. M. (1961). op. cit.
ioo   Part I Patterns of exploitation     FLANNERY


      106 May, J. M. (1961). op. cit. p. 357; Cressey, G. B. (i960). Crossroads: land
          and life in South-west Asia. Chicago.
      107 May, J. M. (1961). ibid.
      108 Palerm, A. and Wolf, E. (1957). Ecological potential and cultural develop¬
          ment in Mesoamerica, in Studies in Human Ecology, Social Science
          Monographs, 3, Pan American Union, Washington, D.C. pp. 1-37.
      109 Palerm, A. and Wolf, E. (1957). op. cit. p. 36.
      no May, J. M. (1961). op. cit. p. 343.
      in Maruyama, M. (1963). The second cybernetics: deviation-amplifying
          mutual causal processes, American Scientist 51 (2), pp. 164-79; Flannery,
          K. V. (1968). Archaeological systems theory and early Mesoamerica, in
          Anthropological archaeology in the Americas, Anthropological Society of
          Washington.
      P. A. JEWELL

     Wild mammals and their potential for new
     domestication

It is a remarkable fact, to which allusion is made by many authors, that so few
species of the world’s rich mammalian fauna have been domesticated by man.
Most of these species, moreover, were domesticated anciently and when, in
the Neolithic, the four major meat producers, sheep, goats, cattle and pigs,
were under control, domestication for this purpose was practically at an end.
Innumerable alternative species of large herbivore were available for domesti¬
cation but an insignificant number were taken in hand: in Asia several
species of bovini were domesticated and many of them fulfil a role similar to
that of cattle; reindeer are outstanding in having been domesticated to meet
the exigencies of a particular environment; and horses, camels and llamas have
come to serve functions other than food supply. In many areas the inferiority
of the domestic stock in fitness and in productivity must have been obvious,
yet in his migrations man has always attempted to take his exotic beasts with
him. He has preferred to endure their low productivity rather than attempt
the revolution of mastering new species.
  Now, however, man has been brought to the point where he is obliged to
take a new look at his stock. The need arises from his own prodigious in¬
crease in numbers and his increasing demands for meat1. All the species that
could once be hunted are becoming less and less available: natural habitats
have been relentlessly destroyed and the majority of the world’s mammalian
species, certainly the large herbivores, are faced with extinction. Rather than
lose species by default man must review his total animal resources and
amongst other actions initiate a new phase of domestication in order to
exploit those resources to the full2. Success in this process would be a key
factor in meeting the impending catastrophe of a world shortage of food.
  Present meat-producing domestic animals are all members of the order
Artiodactyla and it is within this same order that the greatest potential for
new domestication lies. A broad examination of all mammals suggests five
orders within which species should be domesticated for various purposes:
primates for medical research; rodents for research, for certain types of small-
scale intensive meat production, and as furbearers; carnivores as furbearers;
102   Part I Patterns of exploitation   JEWELL


and the two ungulate orders, Perissodactyla and Artiodactyla for meat
production.
  Of the families in the Perissodactyla only the Equidae appear suitable for
domestication, and of these only zebra remain undomesticated. It is known
from past successes that zebra can be tamed and trained to pull waggons3. The
animals are not now needed for draught but as will be discussed below they
should be considered as possible meat producers.
  The order Artiodactyla comprises 194 species4; ninety-two of these species
are indigenous to Africa and special attention will be given to domestication
in that continent. It would be remiss, however, not to mention the potential
for domestication in the very large family that is excluded from Africa,
namely the deer. There are forty-one species of deer but only one species,
the reindeer, Rangifer tarandus, has been domesticated. The unique value of
this species lies in its exploitation of the tundra. But another deer, the elk,
Alces dices, could well be the best meat producer to exploit the taiga and other
northern, but not extreme arctic zones. Great progress has in fact already
been made in its domestication and in the Pechero-Ilych Park of northern
Russia a large herd of elk are under careful management and selection, and
show most of the attributes required of domestic animals5. Probably other
species of deer merit domestication and their special role would be that of
controlled browsers in the temperate forest zone.



      Potential in Africa

The greatest concentrations of wild large herbivores, and greatest assem¬
blages of species, are in Africa. But many of Africa’s human populations,
typifying developing countries, suffer from lack of animal protein in their
diets6. The African situation is also a challenging one because it is peculiar
that no indigenous species (apart from the ass in North Africa) have been
domesticated there. The major factors contributing to this situation would
seem to be as follows: (a) the relatively recent incursion of agricultural
peoples into southern Africa; (b) the abundant prey species available for
hunting and until recently providing an alternative meat supply; (c) the
presence of several powerful carnivores, the lion, leopard, hyaena and
hunting dog which have presented a severe obstacle to attempting new
domestications; (d) tradition and folk lore which distinguish between wild
beasts and those that “chose to follow man”, and social customs associated
with established domestic species that strongly encourage conservatism. The
prejudices engendered by these factors are not confined to black Africans.
White settlers and the instigators of veterinary policies have proved to be just
as inflexible and instead of treating meat production in Africa as a biological
problem, they have pursued programmes of prodigious game slaughter in an
effort to make the ranges safe for familiar, but unsuitable, domestic animals
                   Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication   103



      Limitations to the productivity of domestic stock
Cattle, sheep, goats and pigs have an evolutionary adaptation to the environ¬
ments in which they originated and a limited ability to adapt to new ones. The
protection afforded by careful husbandry and by veterinary medicine has
permitted an enormous extension of their range, but in some environments
their efficiency is reduced to marginal levels and diseases may offer absolute
barriers. The most outstanding example of limitation by disease is tsetse-
borne trypanosomiasis infection in Africa. The disease renders 4-15 million
square miles of land unavailable to cattle (representing about 37% of the
total land area of Africa)7, but indigenous wild mammals are well adapted to
the parasites. Tremendous effort is expended to try and increase the area in
which cattle can be safely moved and one of the major means of implementing
this policy has been “game elimination”, on the supposition that certain
species of wild mammals act as a reservoir for the disease. Millions of head of
antelopes, buffalo and other species have been slaughtered with variable and
only partial success. The cost in squandered protein resources is not usually
taken into account in assessing these schemes.
  A second limitation to livestock efficiency lies in the physiology and feeding
behaviour of the animals concerned. Much of Africa is arid and hot and animals
must cope with these exigencies8. Many breeds of domestic animals, particularly
cattle of zebu stock, respond reasonably well, but indigenous large mammals
are better equipped having evolved finely adjusted behavioural and physio¬
logical adaptations to these environmental extremes. Several species cope
with heat stress by tolerating considerable fluctuations in body temperature
and thus lessening the need to lose water: buffalo and oryx provide examples9.
The eland voids faeces of low moisture content and this enables it to gain
more preformed water. If eland and ox were eating the same succulent
acacia leaves, and were deprived of drinking water the eland would achieve
the better water balance. An estimated 4 litres of water per 100 kg. body weight
per day is available to the eland from food and metabolic sources so that the
animal can be almost independent of surface water10. The ruminants have
evolved an effective means of nitrogen conservation by urea-recycling through
the salivary glands11, and the species adapted to arid environments can be
expected to be particularly efficient in this regard. Amongst domestic stock in
the tropics, fertility is often low but wild mammals exhibit a remarkably high
reproductive capacity as has been shown in studies on wildebeest, eland and
hartebeest12.
  Finally, in their selectivity towards the plants that they graze or browse,
indigenous mammals probably exhibit superiority over exotic species, and
the antelopes can select a high proportion of the most nutritious parts of
plants. The more important aspect of food-plant use, however, is that
exhibited by a community of indigenous herbivores which can exploit the
5—DOI’AA   *   *
104   Part I Patterns of exploitation   JEWELL


habitat far more efficiently than husbanded groups of cattle, sheep and goats.
Lamprey13 has documented the manner in which a community of herbivores
are separated ecologically and use different parts of a complex environment.
The major species in his study of E. African savannah woodland were harte-
beest, waterbuck, wildebeest, buffalo, zebra, impala, Grant’s gazelle, warthog,
eland, lesser kudu, rhino, dikdik, elephant and giraffe. Of these the first three
are grass feeders; buffalo, eland and kudu take a fair proportion of herbs and
shrubs; warthog tackle sedges; and elephant and giraffe concentrate on
shrubs and trees. This spatial separation is augmented by a separation in the
time and season at which species use different areas, giving rise to a grazing
succession14. These communities can reach a very high biomass and the
carrying capacity of most savannah areas is considerably greater for a complex
of indigenous herbivores than for ranched domestic species15.



      Game cropping

In Africa, biologists have been greatly concerned with the kinds of facts
presented above. If communities of indigenous wild mammals have a much
higher potential productivity than domestic stock then means of harvesting
their yield must be devised. Game cropping16 is the method employed and
many successful schemes are in progress in Uganda, Kenya, Rhodesia and
Zambia. The technical problems of cropping are, however, very great: hunt¬
ing and killing without excessive disturbance is difficult; it is difficult to
maintain quality in handling and processing meat in the field; transport and
haulage are very costly. Nevertheless, from a biological point of view, the
system has one great advantage which is that the several herbivores involved
are free to move and select food plants, water and shelter, in accord with the
way these are best provided by the habitat. The system can make a very big
contribution to meat production and as an “extensive” system of game
ranching is likely to find a permanent place in the economy. Its role however
is different from what would be achieved by newly domesticated species, and
these methods of exploitation must be seen as complementary.



      Domesticating new species in Africa

One species of African large herbivore is now domesticated. This is the
eland Taurotragus oryx. It has long been bred and studied in the Ukraine17
and many small herds are kept in southern Africa18. It shows high fertility,
good live weight gains, and excellent carcass qualities19, and even in those
attributes usually thought of as resulting from domestication such as docility,
ease of handling, and restraint by fences, the eland is superior to range cattle.
Eland thrive under conditions of food, water and tsetse fly infestation in
                  Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication     105

which cattle cannot survive; they can be milked, moreover, and their milk has
peculiar and superior keeping properties of great value in a tropical environ¬
ment20.
  An even greater prize for domestication may exist in the giant eland, T.
derbianus, a form indigenous to W. Africa, and formerly extending in range as
far as the Sudan21. The survival of this species is endangered, however, and in
a visit from Nigeria to the Cameroons in 1966 I was not able to assure myself
that any still survive.
  The blesbok, Damaliscus dorcas, has not reached the same stage of sub¬
jugation as the eland, but, on the other hand, the species exists entirely as
dispersed herds on S. African range-land, where they belong to the land-
owners, and none survive in the wild state. They are small hartebeests, that
can exploit sour veld more effectively than cattle22, that breed and thrive well
in dry conditions and are easily restrained by fences. They can be managed by
being rounded up and impounded in corrals.
  The hartebeests in general form an extremely promising group of species
that should be domesticated. Their radiation in Africa has produced diver¬
gent types that are likely to show particularly valuable adaptations to local
environments. Hybrids occur where geographical races overlap and the two
genera, Damaliscus and Alcelaphus, can be regarded as forming dines through
the continent. Hybrids have been reported between the genera23.
  The domestication of the African buffalo, Synceros cajfer, is long overdue. It
fills a niche that is very similar to the domestic ox, but has all the advantages
of being indigenous. Having a very wide distribution throughout Africa the
species must, in its many local forms, have immunity to a wide range of
trypansomiases and other infections. Tame buffalo have often been reared24
and the fierceness of the wild animals should not be a deterrent to mastering
them. The progenitors of cattle, Bos primigenius, were quite as ferocious, and
other species of bovini, such as the gaur, B. gaurus, have been domesticated
despite their formidable disposition. Buffalo are larger than range cattle,
make good live weight gains, give high carcass yields25 and naturally herd
closely.
  The warthog, Phacochoerus aethiopicus, should be mentioned because it is
unaffected by African swine fever which makes pig-farming difficult. Wart-
hogs are easy to tame and in grubbing for roots and tubers they exploit a
food-source not touched by other species. Experimental rearing and handling
will be required in order to decide which species of African swine, whether
warthog, bush-pig, Potamochoerus porcus, or giant forest hog, Hylochoerus
memertzhagen, is best suited to domestication.
  The wildebeest, Connochaetesgnou, zebra, Equus burchelli, and small gazelles
are the dominant grazers of the great open savannah areas of E. Africa,
and whilst the small animals complement the large, the wildebeest and zebra
would appear to compete for available grazing. In such a situation it would be
essential to study both wildebeest and zebra, and examine the efficiency of
io6   Part I Patterns of exploitation   JEWELL


their ecological adaptations in order to decide which might be the best
domestic producer. Other factors, such as the acceptability of the meat for
human consumption, of course enter such decisions. It might be found that
domestic eland could replace these species in many situations, but to achieve
overall maximum productivity the principle of ecological separation must be
respected. For this same reason, although it might appear extravagant of
effort, it will probably prove economically rewarding to domesticate the small
gazelles.
  Examples will not be multiplied, but it is obvious that many other species
must be considered as candidates for domestication. Selection will depend on
the geographical area, and ecosystem, of intended use, and on the success
achieved with pioneer species.



      General considerations

It may be supposed that the process (in prehistoric times) by which our
present stock were domesticated was a protracted one in which much in¬
genuity, and a great expenditure of human effort was involved. If new
domestication is to be effective it must be done quickly, on a large enough
scale to demonstrate its economic feasibility and every device of animal
control and breeding will need to be used. The foundation stock of tamed
animals should be large so that individuals can be rigorously screened for
suitable breeding stock. Desirable behavioural traits must first be sought
(docility, acceptance of restraint, low aggressiveness, etc.) and intensive
behavioural studies of the species concerned should be initiated early.
Techniques of artificial insemination should be worked out immediately for
each species, just as they are currently being worked out for the asiatic
buffalo, Bubalus bubalus. Males with desirable characters can then sire in¬
creased progeny. Immobilizing and tranquillizing drugs could be used in
many ways to aid handling.
  Certain types of social behaviour in wild ungulates may be incompatible
with ordinary methods of husbandry. It is notable that existing domestic
herbivores are gregarious species that exhibit dominance hierarchies within
their social groups, and this organization is well seen in feral cattle26, feral
sheep27 and wild gaur28. Many species of African buck, however, exhibit
territorial behaviour29 in which the males take possession of certain areas of
land and exclude other males. It has been suggested30 that this behaviour
would be unfavourable in domestic stock, but whilst superficially this might
appear likely it seems to me that a better understanding of the whole social
organization of territorial species would indicate ways of overcoming the
difficulties, and even of turning them to advantage. The dominant males in a
herd of some newly domesticated species, if firmly attached to small terri¬
tories, could offer focal points of attraction keeping the herd together. The
                 Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication     107

effect that territoriality has in dispersing animals through both favourable and
less favourable terrain can promote more intensive use of the habitat31.
Secondary males, not required for breeding, could be castrated and this would
presumably reduce conflict.
  Hybridization could prove a valuable means of manipulating domestic
forms. The hartebeests form dines of two genera, and hybrids between local
geographical races occur naturally32. There appear to be no certain records of
African buffalo crossing with cattle, but they might interbreed with other
bovines. These hybrids, even if sterile, could be expected to exhibit many
useful characters, and their production might provide a means of circumvent¬
ing some of the problems of domesticating buffalo.
  Present-day domesticated forms of cattle, sheep and goats, differ markedly
from their wild progenitors and one of the most significant changes that has
been exhibited is a diminution in size33. Such a change may have accompanied
selection for docility as well as have been induced by poor feeding conditions
in captivity. Any newly domesticated species can be expected to change or be
deliberately changed, in the directions of, for example, improved bodily
proportions for meat production and reduced horn size.
  If the developments discussed above do take place they will yield informa¬
tion of a very valuable kind for archaeologists. The opportunity will exist to
study directly the effects of domestication and selection on a variety of large
mammals, particularly incidental changes in the skeleton. It should also be
noted that current ecological studies of large mammals, and investigations
that would be stimulated by new economic uses, could have much relevance
to an understanding of the ecology of prehistoric man. The work of Laws and
Parker34 on the elephant, for example, has led them to suggest that this
species has been a major agent, together with climate, man and fire, in modi¬
fying the environment of prehistoric Africa.
  The likelihood of physical and behavioural changes serves to emphasize that
domestication cannot be regarded as a form of conservation for species
threatened with extinction. Morris35 comments, referring to domesticated
animals: “Their numbers are dramatically increased. In terms of world
populations they are tremendously successful. But it is a qualified success.
The price they have paid is their evolutionary freedom. They have lost their
genetic independence and ... are now subject to our breeding whims
and fancies.” Domestication is a way of greatly increasing the exploitation of
species that have long been our prey. At the same time it could accelerate the
extermination of the wild form over the range where the domesticated form is
used, and for the same reasons of competition and interference with domestic
stock as happened in the past36. It will then become of even greater import¬
ance to keep truly wild populations in existence in National Parks, and
protected by appropriate hunting laws, so that they can remain available for
study in relatively natural environments, and can provide invaluable reserves
of genetic material.
io8   Part I Patterns of exploitation    JEWELL



      Notes
       1 FAO reports, and information summarized by Crawford, M. A. (i9($).
         The possible use of wild animals as future sources of food in Africa, Vet.
         Rec., 82, p. 305.
       2 Jewell, P. A. (1968). Climate versus man and his animals, Nature, Lond.
         218, pp. 993-4-
       3 Bigalke, R. C. (1965). Can Africa produce new domestic animals ?, New
         Scientist, 374.
       4 Morris, D. (1965). The Mammals. London.
       5 Yazan, Y. and Knorre, Y. (1964). Domesticating elk in a Russian National
         Park, Oryx, 7, pp. 301-4.
       6 Latham, M. (1965). Human Nutrition in Tropical Africa. FAO, Rome; and
         see references in Crawford, M. A. (1968). op. cit.
       7 Phillips, J. (1959). Agriculture and Ecology in Africa. London, pp. 63-72;
         Deshler, W. (1963). Cattle in Africa: distribution, types, and problems,
         Geog. Rev., 53, pp. 52-8.
       8 McDowell, R. E. (1968). Climate versus man and his animals. Nature,
         Lond. 218, p. 641.
       9 Bligh, J. and Harthoorn, A. M. (1965). Continuous radiotelemetric
         records of the deep body temperature of some unrestrained African
         mammals under near natural conditions, J. Physiol., 176, pp. 145-62.
      10 Taylor, C. R. and Lyman, C. P. (1967). A comparative study of the
         environmental physiology of an East African antelope, the eland, and the
          Hereford steer. Physiol. Zool., 40, pp. 280-95.
      11 Livingstone, H. G., Payne, W. J. A. and Friend, M. T. (1962). Urea
          excretion in ruminants, Nature, Lond. 194, pp. 1057-8.
      12 Symposium on Biology of Reproduction in Mammals, Nairobi, 1968.
          Symp. Soc. Reprod. Fert. (In press).
      13 Lamprey, H. E. (1963). Ecological separation of the large mammal
          species in the Tarangire Game Reserve, Tanganyika, East Afr. Wildlf.J.,
          1, pp. 63-92.
      14 Vesey-Fitzgerald, D. F. (i960). Grazing succession among East African
          game animals, J. Mammal., 41, pp. 161-72.
      15 Talbot, L. M., Payne, W. J. A., Ledger, H. P., Verdcourt, L. D. and
          Talbot, M. H. (1965). The meat production potential of wild animals in
          Africa, Commonwealth Bureau An. Breed. Gen. Tech. Comm., 16, p. 42.
      16 Talbot, L. M., Payne, W. J. A., Ledger, H. P., Verdcourt, L. D. and
          Talbot, M. H. (1965). ibid.
      17 Uspenskii, G. A. and Saglanskii, A. D. (1952). Domestication of the eland
          in the U.S.S.R. Summary in Rhod.J. Agric. Res., 1, p. 87.
      18 See Bigalke, R. C. (1964). ibid.
      19 Zyl, J. H. M. van. (1962). The meat production of South African game
          animals. 1. The eland. Fauna and Flora, 13, pp. 35-40; Skinner, J. D.
          (1967). An appraisal of the eland as a farm animal in Africa, Anim. Breed.
          Abst., 35, pp. 177-86.
      20 Treus, V. and Kravchenko, D. (1968). Methods of rearing and economic
          utilization of eland in the Askaniya—Nova Zoological Park, Symp. Zool.
          Soc. London, 21, pp. 395-411.
      21 Sidney, J. (1965). The past and present distribution of some African
          ungulates, Trans. Zool. Soc., London, 30, pp. 1-396.
      22 Kettlitz, W. K. (1967). The Blesbok, Fauna and Flora, 18, pp. 36-46.
      23 D. dorcas X A. buselaphus; Kettlitz, W. K. (1967). ibid.
      24 Bigalke, R. C. and Neitz, W. O. (1954). Indigenous ungulates as a possible
          source of new domesticated animals, J. S. Afr. Vet. Med. Ass., 25, pp.
         45-54-
             Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication          109

25 Zyl, J. H. M. van and Skead, D. M. (1964). Meat production of South
   African game animals. 2. The African buffalo. Fauna and Flora, 15, pp.
   34-40.
26 Schloeth, R. (1958). Cycle annuel et comportement Social du taureau de
   Camargue, Mammalia, 22, pp. 121-39.
27 Grubb, P. and Jewell, P. A. (1966). Social grouping and home range in
   feral Soay sheep, Symp. Zool. Soc., Lond. 18, pp. 179-210.
28 Schaller, G. (1967). The Deer and the Tiger. Chicago.
29 Uganda Kob, see Buechner, H. K. (1963). Territoriality as a behavioural
   adaptation to environment in Uganda Kob, Proc. XVI Int. Congr. Zool.,
   3, pp. 59-63; Waterbuck, see Kiley-Worthington, M. (1965). The water-
   buck in East Africa, Mammalia, 29, pp. 177-204.
30 Hale, E. B. (1962). Domestication and the evolution of behaviour, in
   Hafez, E. S. E. (ed.) The Behaviour of Domestic Animals. London.
31 Jewell, P. A. (1966). The concept of home range in mammals, Symp
   Zool. Soc., Lond. 18, pp. 85-109.
32 Sidney, J. (1965). ibid.
33 Jewell, P. A. (1962). Changes in size and type of cattle from prehistoric to
   medieval times in Britain, Z. Tierziicht Ziicht Biol., 77, pp. 159-67; Jewell,
   P. A. (1963). Cattle from British archaeological sites, Man and Cattle, Occ.
   paper Roy. Anthrop. Inst., 18, pp. 80-91.
34 Laws, R. M. and Parker, I. S. C. (1968). Recent studies on elephant
   population in East Africa, Symp. Zool. Soc., Lond. 21, pp. 219-359.
35 Morris, D. (1967). The Naked Ape. London.
36 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
     I. G. SIMMONS

     Evidence for vegetation changes associated with
     mesolithic man in Britain

      Introduction
In Britain the case for neolithic and later forest clearance is unequivocably
established but is has been customary to regard mesolithic man as a hunter,
fisher, and collector, who did not affect his environment beyond his im¬
mediate   surroundings. Godwin1 says, “He was           one component of the
ecosystem, dependent upon the forest, rivers and lakes for food, surrounded
and dominated by the forest”. The example of Star Carr2 is quoted: here the
pollen record was affected very little by the felling of birch trees to make a
platform and only a few ruderal pollen were present. But Star Carr is but one
type of habitat used by mesolithic man, representing a lowland “wet” site,
i.e. in close contact with a lake and in a generally damp area. Other environ¬
ments include lowland “dry” sites, such as Addington, Kent3, Selboume4, and
Iping Common5, many of them being heathland today. In addition there are
numerous instances of mesolithic finds, often in large quantities, on the
moorlands. Bodmin Moor, Dartmoor, the Pennines, and the North York
Moors are examples6. The discovery of a lack of environmental modification
as typified by Star Carr, does not mean that a similar culture may not have
had a definite effect in a different habitat and it is proposed here to concentrate
on some investigations in the uplands. Here, the general pattern of finds is the
discovery of large numbers of microliths on the soil surface or stratified at a
peat-soil interface.



      Pollen-analytical evidence
I Dartmoor.     Investigations by the author7 of a streamside exposure at
1500 ft. (457 m.) not far from the source of the Blacklane Brook revealed a
phase during late zone VI which was interpreted as representing forest
recession. The deposit was amorphous blanket peat above a wood layer and
the evidence for an opening in the forest consisted of a sudden peak in
112   Part I Patterns of exploitation     SIMMONS


Pteridium which was coincident with an occurrence of Artemisia and a large
peak in Gramineae, followed by curves for several helophytes and for Prunus-
Sorbus type (probably S. aucuparia); though generally declining, the Corylus
curve also shows a peak at the point. After the initial explosion, the values
recede slightly but do not revert to their former absence. In this particular
context of time and locality the hypothesis of a clearance due to fire (Calluna
disappears) during the mesolithic cultural period was suggested. Its strati¬
graphic position suggests that it occurred in conjunction with the changeover
from forest to blanket mire; and the general unlikeliness of lightning fire
being a causative agent here allows the possibility that mesolithic man was in
some way concerned, but it is not implied that the use of fire was deliberate.
A parallel occurrence, characterized especially by a high (10% of AP) peak
of Rumex, along with Artemisia and Compositae pollen, is seen at site PA.2.
This is near Postbridge (1200 ft.), where mesolithic implements have been
found.
  2 Stump Cross, near Grassington, Yorks.        This site8 is important because
mesolithic flint flakes are stratified into muds. At the level of a flake charcoal is
found, and an Artemisia grain (cf. Blacklane on Dartmoor, supra, but there is
no Pteridium response); the Corylus curve rises sharply and there is a kink in
Ulmus. The time context is early zone Vila. Walker is inclined to see these
changes in pollen frequency as resulting from blanket mire inception due to
climatic change but they would equally well bear the interpretation of the
opening of a forest.
  3 The North York Moors.         Recent and hitherto unpublished work has
been carried out by the author on Egton High Moor, part of the central
watershed of this upland (Figs. 1, 2, 3). The most important site is at North
Gill, 1215 ft. (370 m.) where the base of the blanket peat shows a Poly trichum
peat (2-5 cm. thick) which is in some places overlain by a peat deposit con¬
sisting largely of charcoal (this is also up to 5 cm. thick). An amorphous
blanket peat then covers all. Detailed pollen analyses through the sequences

          mineral soil-^Polytrichum peat—^amorphous peat, and
         mineral soil->charcoal peat—> amorphous peat,

reveal similar patterns. In the amorphous peat at the horizon of the charcoal,
there are peaks in Pinus (30% of AP, hitherto at 5%) with a fall-off' in Quercus
and Alnus; Betula, Fraxinus and Corylus are high, as is Salix, and grains of
Artemisia, and Rumex, and spores of Pteridium are found. Afterwards, the
Pinus declines and Quercus regains its values, along with very high Alnus
frequencies. The Artemisia and Pteridium values remain low but do not
disappear. Analyses through the charcoal peat itself are equally revealing:
the same peaks of Pinus are found, along with high Betula, Corylus, but low
Quercus. The more detailed (2 cm. interval) analysis shows that Sphagnum
more or less disappears at the horizon of the ruderal pollen types (Plantago
lanceolata, Senecio type, Rumex and Chenopodiaceae). Forest regeneration is
                        Evidence for British mesolithic vegetation changes   113

shown by higher values of Quercus, Corylus, and Aims, diminution of the
ruderals and the come-back of Sphagnum.
  All this is consistent with an opening of the forest, which was probably
temporary, although there are hints, as on Dartmoor, that some land may
have remained open. The time context is early to mid Vila and so the
association of this phase with mesolithic man is hard to resist, especially since
this is an area of so many artefacts. Dimbleby9 came to similar conclusions in
the same region when as a consequence of soil pollen analyses he suggested
that fire resulted in an increase of Betula and Corylus (this is confirmed by the
present analyses, although they suggest these were not permanent effects),
increase of grass and Calluna beneath a lighter canopy (borne out for
Gramineae, but not on the whole for Calluna), and decrease of alder (again, a
temporary flourishing is suggested rather than a permanently increased
presence). Dimbleby’s suggestion of a lighter canopy is possibly corroborated
by the presence of Melampyrum, which Iversen10 has interpreted as indicat¬
ing the formation of partial clearings in formerly virgin forests.



      Evidence from analogous situations

This method of reasoning has many pitfalls, not least the use of present-day
cultural practices as analogies for the past, but in the case of the accounts of
early European travellers in the deciduous and mixed forests of the Eastern
seaboard of North America we may perhaps be more certain of its usefulness,
where although agriculture was practised, hunting and fishing was still an
important part of the economy. The effects of the Indians on their environ¬
ment as a result of these pursuits was often clearly recorded.
   Even the palaeolithic populations of the late-glacial period, Lawrence
et al.n suggested, may have prolonged the successional stages. But the
evidence for vegetation change in the eastern woodlands is much stronger12.
   The nomadism of some of the tribes did not, it appears, prevent them from
affecting the ecology: “temporary dwellings of a nomadic family band might
be occupied by a small partially cleared area, while semi-permanent villages
occupied clearings of considerable magnitude ... as much as 100 or 150
acres”13.
   It seems likely that populations here were larger than was likely in meso¬
lithic England although the reports of an annual cycle of migration (seashore
in summer, deep woods hunting camps in autumn and winter and rivers in
spring) do not conflict with our conception of the life a pre-agricultural
hunting, fishing, and gathering group.
   The use of fire by the Indians was apparently deliberate: in the Hudson
River and Lake Champlain regions the woods were burned in the autumn
and again in the spring in order to make hunting easier, to improve the
growth of grass and to surround game. Inland from Narragansett Bay, a
     114   Part 1 Patterns of exploitation                             simmons

                         D
                        -I"

                                                                                                                           z—      a




cm                       1111 L..L-L                                        i   i       i               j_1   illi                               L
                         0  30 0                           50      0                          50         80 0         30    10         10        0    !

                             Pinus             Betula                      Quercus                              Ulmus      Tilio   Proxinus Ainas

     NG 'a'                          POLLEN                     SUM                          COMPONENTS




     Fig i The basal part of the North Gill “a” profile, through the Poly trichum
           peat (horizontal lines) into the amorphous peat (dots). Note the two
           peaks of Pinus which are found again in North Gill “b”. This is the tree




               J         L                                                                          L          J  L
               50        0            50          100            150                               50         100 0                              60

       Calfuno               Gramineae                                                      Cyperaceae                 R lanceolata


       NG a
     Fig 2 North Gill “a” profile, non-tree pollen; symbols as in Fig i. Note the




                                                                                                                -1— 1 -)
              0        300     25 0              50 70 0        25 10 5             0              50           100 120    0                50
               Pinus     Betula      Quercus            Ulmus      Tilia            Alnus                                  Coryloid

                                                                           Fraxinus

     NG'b'
               [    POLLEN            SUM      COMPONENTS              1

     Fig 3 North Gill “b” profile, through the charcoal peat (black triangles) into
             the amorphous peat (black dots; with charred twig marked “V”). Note
             the two 30% Pinus peaks, and the correspondence of the Quercus fall-
                                                           Evidence for British mesolithic vegetation changes                                                                                           115



                                                                                                                                                            ■                                                    ; Vila

                                                                                                                   • Lonicera              - --                                                                   I


                                                                                                                   • Lonicera              —- -—                                                                 -

                                                                                                                   • Hedera                -                                                                      1
!                                                   j_1_i                        1 '            1         Li                               L   I        I        I       I    I l          I    I       I         I
00      150     200 0                      50       100     150     200          0         20             5                                0                                 50                                  100

                                                                                                                                               Trees                                           " Weeds"

                                                                                           V-




                           pollen diagram; an open square = 1% frequency, a large dot = present
                           but less than 1%. The Ulmus decline can be clearly seen.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vila
                                      o
                                      ★
                                                                                                                                                                                                    □
                                      □         —                                                                                                                                                   □


                           o
                           n
                           □
                                      o



    I_II_IU                            U L
     10 10 5                           5 0                          50 0                                                50                                           100               120 0                                  25

                                     ^               Filicales                       Sphagnum                                                                                                       Pteridium
                                  iZ, o.

                                  q o Or-
                                 •   %
                           early presence of Rumex and Urtica.
                                                                                                               I   to
            0                     o                          □                                                     □                                □ 0
            □                     □                          □               0                                     □                                □ □
                                  □         CO                           0   CO        '                                    1 I                     □ CO                     □
                                  □                          c          □ DO                                                I                       □ □                      0
      197                         □                          [=□             a                                              D •                     □ □ 375 □
                                                                                                                            0 *                                                                              --BU
                                  □                          CO          B   □

      JJ 1 1    1    1 i    U j                           _U 1111 U L_!                         U U                         u u                     1     11 1           1 11 1        1   l    11 1 1                1   1     1 1
      150 0         25:     5 I       10                   50 0 25 5 10                             5 5                     5     5                     10 0              30 0                 45 0                           , 100
                                                                                                                                                   -0 -o ■«                                                 A'
                                                                                                    u QAC ^
                                                                                                                                               d^
                                                                                                                                                                                 <S>
            Sail*     -5- C ^         0
                                                                                                     %    -» a-                       <3                    y,       0
                                                                                                                                                                                  \                         \    J*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               J'-;
                                                                   cl                % % o *0                       C. <c
                                                                                       %9 *>»                           '                                                          \
                                                                                                                                %                       \




                           off with the rise in the “weeds”, especially Rumex, Melampyrum.
                           Black dots indicate frequencies of less than 1%, stars pollen found in
                           scanning but not included in the count.
n6    Part I Patterns of exploitation   SIMMONS


traveller in 1524 noted open plains 25-30 leagues in extent and some town
histories in Connecticut mention the allocation of meadow land to incoming
settlers, the implication being that these were open spaces created by the
Indians. Similar meadows existed in Yosemite valley where the Indians
burned in order to favour the oaks which were their staple source of starch;
when the land was emparked succession to closed coniferous forest took
place14.
  Many other instances of Indian effects upon forest ecology can be
chronicled and their effects on land which is open already or at a forest-
grassland ecotone are well known15. It appears that fire was deliberately used
in the forests of the New World to make conditions easier for hunting, to
assist directly in hunting and to improve the forage for potential game
species.



      Towards a mechanism

Using both the evidence afforded by analogous cultures and the fragmentary
hints from the pollen analyses it is possible to suggest an ecological mechanism
whereby mesolithic man effected forest clearance. This is preliminary only
and doubtless improvements to the sequence outlined will be suggested in due
course.
  We may suppose that there were on the higher parts of our uplands areas
particularly favourable to game, perhaps seasonally. The forest might be
broken or slightly thinner because of environmental factors or, more likely
these sites were known to mesolithic man, who would set up hunting
camps in the vicinity. Grieg and Rankine16 found that on the flanks of Dart¬
moor the greatest concentrations of mesolithic implements were at spring
heads and at the North Gill sites referred to above single grains of Potamogeton
and Typha latifolia were found. In order to improve the terrain for hunting,
fire was used to clear underbrush and to corral game. Thus open spaces were
created and doubtless the camps themselves created the open habitats in
which ruderals might flourish. The clearing in North Yorkshire however
seems to be of the major forest trees, with regeneration of light-demanding
pioneer species so that either some way of immediately clearing the larger
trees was used (ring barking is an obvious possibility) or a long-term process
was at work. The repeated use of fire would kill regenerating trees and the
subsequently increased numbers of game would graze out the others so that
in time no regeneration of the forest components would take place. There
might come a time when the system broke down because the game avoided the
area or because the local populations had been too vigorously culled. Then the
clearing created would colonize back to forest, via Corylus, Betula and
Fraxinus stages. In some circumstances it is not inconceivable that soil
deterioration had set in, preventing the regrowth of the high forest to its
                                                                 -                              Regeneration by                                                -
                                                                  clearing              light-deman ding trees clearing
                                                                  REFORESTED            - DESERTED
                                                                  BUT NOT TOTALLY       ? PodzoliS8tion        BY MAN
                                                                                                     </>
                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                     a>
                                                                                                     >•     4->        s    r_
                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                Q.   cd                     o




                                                                                            X                                        O
                                                                                                       Q-   o     -o   N
                                                                                                                       o        CO   4->   C




                                                                                                                                                               £'5 o
                                                                                                                                                                    c-        a> —
                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                               <2 m
                                                                                                                                                                  > o2-S §»
                                                                                                                                                                              ° Jc
                                                                                                                                               UOJ^BSjlOZpOd




                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                               «<
                                                                                                                                                               U4              (S
                                                                                                                                                               o              Z
                                                                                                 </>
                                                                                                at
                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                        CD
                                                                                                       CD              TO   c
                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                        <=n


fig 4 A possible mechanism for the sequence of clearing by Mesolithic man in upland areas
Ii8   Part I Patterns of exploitation    SIMMONS


former condition. This would account for the continued open space indica¬
tors at Blacklane (Dartmoor) and North Gill (North York Moors). This is
shown schematically above as Fig. 4.



      Conclusion

Although more evidence is needed, this discussion points to the possibility
of clearance by mesolithic man in what was to become a marginal environ¬
ment. Irreversible effects were probably limited to these areas and that is why
Star Carr does not fall into such a category. The evidence so far assembled
points to the fact that only in upland areas or areas where the soil was changed
easily by rapid pedogenic processes such as podzolization after clearance (on
high ground this may have meant that he was an important agent in the
inception of blanket bog), did mesolithic man exert a strong or lasting effect
on his environment. But at a rough estimate, such areas may have comprised
about five-eighths of England and Wales17.



      Notes
       1 Godwin, H. (1965). The beginnings of agriculture in Western Europe in
         Hutchinson, J. (ed.) Essays on Crop Plant Evolution. Cambridge.
       2 Clark, J. G. D. (1954). Excavations at Star Carr. Cambridge.
       3 Dimbleby, G. W. (1963). Pollen analysis of a site at Addington, Kent.
         Grana Palynol., 4, 140-8.
       4 Rankine, W. F. and Dimbleby, G. W. (i960). Further excavations at a
         Mesolithic site at Oakhanger, Selborne, Hants., Proc. Prehist. Soc., 26,
         pp. 246-62.
       5 Keef, P. A. M., Wymer, J. J. and Dimbleby, G. W. (1965). A Mesolithic
         site on Iping Common, Sussex, England, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 31, pp. 85-92.
       6 Fox, A. (1964). South-West England-, Elgee, F. and H. W. (1933). The
         Archaeology of Yorkshire; Wainwright, G. J. (i960). Three microlithic
         industries from South-west England and their affinities, Proc. Prehist.
         Soc., 26, pp. 193-201.
       7 Simmons, I. G. (1964). Pollen diagrams from Dartmoor, New Phytol.,
         63, pp. 165-80; Simmons, I. G. (In press). Early man and environment on
         Dartmoor, Proc. Prehist. Soc.
       8 Walker, D. (1956). A site at Stump Cross, near Grassington, Yorkshire,
         and the age of the Pennine microlithic industry, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 22,
         pp. 23-8.
       9 Dimbleby, G. W. (1961). The ancient forest of Blackamore, Antiquity, 35,
         pp. 123-8.
      10 Iversen, J. (1964). Retrogressive vegetational succession in the Post¬
         glacial, J. Ecol., 52 (Suppl.), pp. 59-70; and Personal communication.
      11 Lawrence, D. B., Schoeniker, R. E., Quispel, A. and Bond, G. (1967).
         The role of Dryas drummondii in vegetation development following ice
         recession at Glacier Bay, Alaska, with special reference to its nitrogen
         fixation by root nodules, J. Ecol., 55, pp. 793-813.
      12 Day, G. M. (1953). The Indian as a factor in the North-eastern forest,
         Ecology, 34, pp. 329-346; Niering, W. A. and Goodwin, R. H. (1962).
                   Evidence for British mesolithic vegetation changes       119


    Ecological studies in the Connecticut Aboretum Natural Area. I. Intro¬
    duction and Survey of vegetation types. Ecology, 43, pp. 41-54.
13 Day, G. M. (1953). op. cit. p. 330.
14. Gibbens, R. P. and Heady, H. F. (1964). The Influence of Modern Man
    on the vegetation of the Yosemite valley, Calif. Agri. Bull., 36.
15 Stewart, O. C. (1956). Fire as the first great force employed by man, in
    Thomas, W. L. (ed.) Man’s Role in Changing the Face of the Earth.
    London, pp. 115-33.
16 Grieg, O. and Rankine, W. F. (1956). A stone age settlement system near
   East Week, Dartmoor, Proc. Devon Arch, and Expl. Soc., 5, pp. 8-25.
17 The full profiles, of which figs. 1-3 are extracts, are published in Simmons,
    I. G. (In press). Pollen diagrams from the North York Moors, New
    Phytol, 68.
Part II: Methods of investigation
      Section i: Domestication and exploitation of plants




     J. ALEXANDER

      The indirect evidence for domestication

Botanists, zoologists and archaeologists interested in the problems of domesti¬
cation have naturally been concerned with the “direct” evidence, which may
be “cultural” or “non-cultural”. Direct cultural evidence is precise literary
references, drawings, paintings and carvings, specialized tools, and cultiva¬
tion systems. Indirect cultural evidence includes the actual remains of plant
cultigens preserved by carbonization, matrix impressions, silica skeletons,
and the bones, teeth, horns or antlers of animals. Unfortunately, some
archaeologists have accepted a number of other cultural traits associated with
early farming communities in Europe, Western Asia and Northern Africa as
diagnostic of the beginnings of domestication, when these are, at best, only
“indirect” evidence and of very limited value; “indirect” non-cultural
evidence from botany and zoology has been little considered. It may be of
use to examine here the restrictions which should be placed on some kinds of
cultural interpretation and the increasing importance which should be
attached to the non-cultural. Before doing this the central role of the field
archaeologist in solving these problems may be stressed. Evidence of any
kind can only come from carefully excavated and well-dated sites, and whilst
the techniques of excavation may be learnt by botanists and zoologists who
are prepared to serve a full archaeological apprenticeship, the evidence will
not be obtained without it. For the foreseeable future, progress must be by
teams of workers led by archaeologists.
   The indirect cultural evidence comprises most of the material found in
excavations, for it takes its final proof of being connected with farmers or
pastoralists, from non-cultural evidence. How unreliable is indirect cultural
evidence has been made clear by ethnology, which has been too little re¬
garded by prehistorians. Cultural evidence has been overemphasized in the
124   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     ALEXANDER


past because of the historical accident that much of the early work has been
done in Western Europe—where the cultural evidence has special
validity. This region received its knowledge of farming from outside and its
first farmers possessed skills, in particular those of making pottery and
ground-stone tools, which were the product of millennia of development
elsewhere. It was these skills which enabled them to be identified and they
were in fact isolated culturally before it was certain that they were farmers.
When criteria established in Western Europe are applied to other parts of the
world the results can be unfortunate.
   With the exception of Australia, some husbandry of indigenous plants and
animals existed in all continents in the historic present (sixteenth century
a.d.). The range and variation in methods of cultivation and equipment was
very wide and by analogy, any attempt by prehistorians to take a particular
cultural trait out of its local setting and to infer a relationship between it and
any particular plant or animal domestication is unsound.
   Examples of some of the more striking points still often disregarded by
archaeologists may be listed.

      Societies without domesticated plants or animals who use:


1 Digging sticks; America1, Australia2, Asia3, Africa4.
2 Grinding stones; America5, Australia6, Asia7.
3 Ground stone tools; Australia8.
4 Irrigation including dams and channels, and fences for wild plants;
  America9.
5 Pottery; Asia10, America11, Africa12.
6 Storage pits13, metal14, long-settled villages, elaborate social organizations
  and substantial houses, all in North America15.


      Societies with domestic plants and animals who lack the following:


1 Ground stone tools or any other farming equipment leaving durable
  evidence; America16.
2 Pottery; in the Pacific17.
3 Grinding stones; Africa18.

   This suggests that the most cultural traits should be considered only as
part of larger complexes of facts. In detail these may be discussed under the
following headings:
   i Clearing the land. This will be necessary in most parts of the world and
may need tools different from those used by hunter /gatherers. These may not
be specialized enough to be direct evidence of clearance (indeed no tools at all
may be used) but the heavy component of late glacial and early post-glacial
lithic industries should be studied with this use in mind. The apparent
                                     The indirect evidence for domestication   125


 abandonment in West Africa of many of the clearing tools when the work was
 finished19 is interesting, for it might lead to identifying clearing systems here
 and elsewhere. The signs of wear on stone tools should also be considered
 with this use in mind20.
    2 Preparation of the land, planting or sowing. This will usually be done
 with such tools as digging sticks, hoes, rakes and ploughs. Only in the case of
 the plough are these specialized enough to be precisely linked with full
 agriculture, and digging sticks will always be particularly difficult to assess21.
 Stone, bone, antler or wooden hoes, are on ethnographic evidence, rarely used
 for planting22 although widely used for mounding-up. It seems possible that a
 limited role should be accepted for many of those found in excavation.
     Sowing as opposed to planting and the relationship of this to cultivation
 techniques might be suggested by a study of these tools.
    3 Harvesting. The variety of reaping methods known from ethnography
 includes many which leave no durable evidence23. Some of these methods are
 also used by gatherers and this makes durable harvesting tools difficult to
 assess.
    Reaping knives and sickles, unless a study of the wear on them gives
 precise evidence24, are relatively valueless, unless supported by non-cultural
evidence.
    4 Processing and storing. Many crops need treatment if they are to be kept,
and if grown in quantity, need special stores. It is possible in the excavation
of settlements that features connected with these processes will be identified,
and since quite elaborate ones are, as has been mentioned25 used by gatherers,
they may belong to incipient as well as long established agricultural societies.
 Seed-crops may need threshing and winnowing floors, drying racks or ovens;
roots, tubers and rhizomes may need graters, squeezers or heating bowls.
None of these will be conclusive without non-cultural evidence. Storage may
leave good archaeological evidence as clamps and pits or above ground stacks
or stores. The special designs of these may be recognizable in plan and con¬
struction in well-established agricultural/vegecultural societies but in initial
ones will need the support of non-cultural evidence.
    In this context Forde’s observation that storage in the tropics is largely
unnecessary except where large accumulations are needed for social purposes26
is interesting.
   5 Cooking and preparation for eating. Grinding, pounding or grating is
necessary for many food crops but since all these techniques are used by
gatherers, they cannot, of themselves, be indicative of domestic crops, or
even of food preparation. They are also used for preparing paints and poisons.
In cooking, much specialized equipment may be highly suggestive of particu¬
lar crops; for example interior-heated ovens in wheat and barley growing
areas or baking plates in manioc growing ones. Only in association with non-
cultural evidence are they conclusive.
   6 Evidence of animal keeping. Durable equipment seems less common.
126   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   ALEXANDER


from ethnographic parallels, for animal-keeping than for agriculture and a
wider range of motives seems to lead to their being kept. Evidence from the
form of containers (milk or cheese holders) is of course unreliable without
non-cultural evidence27. In some societies byres and corrals may be recog¬
nized with the help of other kinds of non-cultural evidence.
   The indirect non-cultural evidence has been much less considered than the
direct. This is unfortunate for it is probably from it, and not from the
cultural evidence that the beginnings of domestication in most areas will be
recognized. Hope of future advance lies in the increasing interest being shown
by natural scientists. With their help, an increasingly wide range of research
techniques may be tried on each new final-glacial or early post-glacial site as
it is discovered. The field archaeologist must have discussed the theoretical
possibilities of applying specialized knowledge and techniques from many
disciplines before excavation begins. This will mean a kind of collaboration
very different from the rather formal post-excavation one which has usually
taken place in the past. Only when the relationships are intimate and dis¬
cussion is wide ranging will the possible uses of highly specialized techniques
be realized28. Some of the more oblique evidence so far recovered may be
considered as examples.
    In the botanical sciences two kinds of indirect evidence may be instanced.
Any disturbance of a natural vegetation cover will provide growth oppor¬
tunities for plants not normally dominant. In agricultural clearings, selective
weeding may further favour particular small or low-growing plants. This
phenomenon has been much studied and complexes of weeds in fields of
 different crops in all parts of the world29 are well known. Their occurrence
in excavated pollen spectra or, particularly, in macroscopic collections,
 might sometimes indicate not only cultivation but even the kind of crops
 being grown. The possibility of recognizing regularly cropped pasture by its
 selective weeds must be considered30.
    Refinements in sampling techniques for pollen study have meant that thin
 successive, even annual strata of deposition, can be recognized and sampled.
 These may reveal very local and temporary disturbances in a vegetation cover,
 and in conjunction with domestic plant and weed pollens can identify human
 interference with it for agriculture31. Alternatively, variations in the pro¬
 portional representation of plants in the natural spectrum may be attributable
 to man.
    Much of what has just been said for plants is true for molluscs. Molluscan
 evidence can be used either as complementary to the botanical or, in its
 absence, as an alternative to it32. Disturbances in a vegetation cover will
 profoundly alter the molluscan spectrum and make the change recognizable
 in stratified deposits. Species favouring cultivated fields or even particular
 crops33 may also be distinguishable. The presence of other species may also
 indicate the presence of animals. The possibilities of the study of specialized
 molluscan pests needs much further attention by archaeologists.
                                    The indirect evidence for domestication   127


  Entomological evidence must become of increasing importance in the
future34. Many insects are even more limited in their tolerance of vegetation
change than molluscs, and also more selective in their feeding habits35.
Identifiable fragments of insects, mainly cuticles and legs, occur in sites of all
ages36 and in a variety of wet, dry, acid and non-acid conditions. From the
evidence of insect pests, the kind of crops being grown or the kind of animals
being kept, may be identifiable, as may be buildings used as stores (for
example, as cereal granaries) or byres (for sheep, goats or cattle).
   Parasitology may also play a much greater part in identifying farming in the
future. The survival of parasites either as eggs37, or spores38, is now well
attested and since parasites such as Nematodes are usually highly selective in
their hosts, they might well help to give some indication of the crops or
animals present.
   Zoology can provide an indirect evidence of plant agriculture by showing
the presence of vertebrate pests; concentrations of rodent bones for example
may indicate cereal granaries. Indirect zoological evidence of animal
husbandry has been much considered in recent years and it may be that too
much attention has been paid to it in considering the beginnings of domestica¬
tion39. The ageing and sexing of excavated animal populations has been much
developed but much less is known of the difference between tame and wild
herds, or of the exploitation of the latter by hunting societies40. The effects of
castration upon bone and other tissues may well be of more use in the future
distinguishing early or intermediate stages of domestication41.
   One kind of indirect geological evidence may be cited here. The human
clearance of hillsides in regions of torrential rain can quickly lead to sheet
erosion, and this in association with other kinds of evidence, could indicate
farming42.
   In conclusion it may be suggested that attention has perhaps been too much
concentrated upon a looking-backwards from established farming com¬
munities in attempts to see traits present in them in their ancestral societies43.
An analogy might be made with some of the earlier approaches of physical
anthropology to the problems of human evolution. If more attention was paid
to late glacial and immediately post-glacial societies, using the methods of
study suggested by ethnography, and implementing them by the techniques
of a number of natural science disciplines, the balance might be restored.




      Notes
      1 Paiute (Great Basin): Forde, C. D. (1964). Habitat, Economy and Society.
        London.
      2 Bindibu (Central West Australia): Thomson, D. F. (1964). Some wood
        and stone implements of the Bindibu tribe of Central West Australia,
        Proc. Prehist. Soc., 30, pp. 404-8.
128   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants         ALEXANDER


       3 Veddas (Ceylon): Allchin, B. (1966). The Stone Tipped Arrow. London,
         p. 128.
       4 Bushmen and others.
       5 Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
       6 Thomson, D. F. (1964). op. cit.
       7 Allchin, B. (1966). op. cit.
       8 Warramunga (Central Australia): Spencer, B. and Gillen, F. (1913).
         Across Australia. London, p. 368.
       9 Paiute: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid; Kwakiutl (British Columbia): Forde,
         C. D. (1964). ibid.
      10 Andaman Islanders: Radcliffe-Browne, A. R. (1964). The Andaman
         Islanders. London; Veddas: Allchin, B. (1966). op. cit.
      11 Yokut (Great Basin): Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      12 Bushmen and others.
      13 Paiute: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      14 North-west Coast tribes generally: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      15 Olson, R. (1927). Adze, Canoe and House Types of the North West Coast.
         Washington.
      16 Hopi (Arizona): Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      17 South Solomon Islanders: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      18 Ambo (Zambia): Stefaniszin, B. (1964). The Ambo. Livingstone; and
         Sub-Saharan Africa generally.
      19 Davies, O. (1958). West Africa, COW A Area Report, 2, p. 1.
      20 As suggested by Dr. Ruth Tringham.
      21 For example, hoes among the Chenchu (South India): Allchin, B. (1966).
         op. cit. p. hi. Weights, unless found on digging sticks, are unreliable
         evidence since similar objects have other uses, e.g. loomweights, mace
         heads, net sinkers.
      22 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit., p. 379.
      23 For example, beaters and baskets.
      24 As suggested by Dr. Ruth Tringham.
      25 Paiute: Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit.
      26 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit., p. 380.
      27 The recent identification of polypeptic acids in pot sherds may be of
         significance here.
      28 For example, the recent identification of polypeptic acids in pot sherds.
      29 Salisbury, Sir E. (1961). Weeds and Aliens. London. Thirty-nine families of
         weeds in wheatfields and fourteen in temperate grassland are listed.
      30 The same kind of identification is possible in the tropics, see Adams, L.
         and Baker, J. (1962). Weeds of the cultivated and grazing lands of Ghana,
         in Wills, W. (ed.) Agriculture and Land Use in Ghana.
      31 Dimbleby, G. W. (1967). Plants and Archaeology. London, p. 148.
      32 Evans, J. Molluscs in chalk soils, Unpublished paper presented to the
         Research Seminar in Archaeology and Related Subjects, 1967.
      33 For example, the East African “Banana” snail.
      34 Sparks, B. (1963). Non-marine mollusca and archaeology, in Brothwell,
         D. R. and Higgs, E. (eds.) Science and Archaeology. London.
      35 For example, “Yam” beetles (Heteroligus sp. and Prionoryctes sp.) or
         Aspidoproctus. Jerath, M. (1965). Yam pests and their known parasites
         and predators in Nigeria, Nig. Dept, of Agric. Research, Memo. 83.
      36 From Inter-glacial deposits onwards.
      37 Pike, A. and Biddle, M. (1966). Parasite eggs in mediaeval Winchester,
         Antiquity, 40, p. 293.
      38 Levy, J. (1958). Vegetable complex of Coffin, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 23, p. 162.
      39 Herre, W. (1963). The science and history of domestic animals, in
         Brothwell, D. R. and Higgs, E. ibid.
                              The indirect evidence for domestication    129


40 Detailed surveys of large collections of wild animal bones, as for example
   at Solutre or Mount Carmel, need to be undertaken.
41 For example, the recent identification of castrated reindeer from antler
   tissue.
42 As perhaps at Nok; Fagg, B. A. B. (1959). The Nok culture in prehistory,
   J. Niger. Hist. Soc., 1.
43 See the use of the term “neolithic” in Central Asia; Mongait, L. (1958).
    Archaeology in the U.S.S.R. London.
      D. M. DIXON

      A note on cereals in ancient Egypt


This paper is confined to noting briefly some of the evidence on cereals in
ancient Egypt down to the Ptolemaic period. This is considered, somewhat
arbitrarily perhaps, under two headings, Direct and Indirect evidence. Under
the former is included the archaeological-botanical and artistic evidence and
under the latter the textual evidence. Limitations of space have precluded
discussion of such matters as ancient Egyptian agricultural implements,
granaries, etc., and no attempt is made to discuss the origins of the various
species, or the route(s) by which they may have entered Egypt1.



      Direct evidence
The staple wheat species of Egypt was emmer, Triticum dicoccum. Indeed,
until fairly recently it was the only species of wheat reported from Egypt from
neolithic times down to the Ptolemaic period. All finds of emmer wheat
known up to 1940 have been listed, with references by V. and G. Tack-
holm2. According to Percival3, fragments of wood and ivory carvings (natural
size) of cereal spikes found in the tomb of Djer at Abydos probably represent
emmer rather than barley, as stated by Petrie4.
   Spelt, T. spelta, which is frequently mentioned in discussions of Egyptian
wheat, and often appears in translations of Egyptian texts, has never been
found in Egyptian grain deposits.
   In 1948 the top of an uncarbonized spike of wheat was found in a grave at
the neolithic site of El-Omari. In Debono’s preliminary report on the ex¬
cavations5, Mrs. Tackholm refers to this specimen as Triticum monococcum,
einkom, and elsewhere6 she states “When I saw this ear, I got the impression
that what we had here was quite another type of wheat, not met with earlier at
the excavations, viz. T. monococcum L.” The spike was subsequently sub¬
mitted to E. Schiemann, E. Tschermak, and H. Kihara, all of whom agreed
that it was T. monococcum,1. In 1951 Tackholm published8 the results of her
examination of the plant material discovered by Firth in 1927 in rooms
opening off an underground gallery near the north enclosure wall of the Step
132   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   DIXON


Pyramid complex at Saqqara. The bulk of this material consisted of “ex¬
tremely well preserved” wheat and barley, including complete spikes of both
cereals. Among these, Tackholm encountered “once more the type of T.
monococcum. As a matter of fact, a detailed investigation of the material
proved to me that a fair portion of the material consisted of T. monococcum.
Again, another cereal find from Icheti’s tomb, Saqqara, from the Vlth
Dynasty, excavated by J.-P. Lauer also seems to be T. monococcum9.”
   Samples from the Step Pyramid galleries were submitted to Aberg, who
stated in his report10 that a detailed study of the “two markedly different
types” of wheat specimens sent to him “clearly showed that two species were
represented, namely Triticum monococcum L. and Triticum dicoccum Schiibl.”.
After describing the characters of the wheat identified as T. monococcum,
Aberg remarks that it “seems to be rather closely related to the variety which
Percival (1921) described as var. vulgare Kcke.”. He concludes with the
words “At the present time there is therefore no doubt but what the ancient
Egyptians knew about Triticum monococcum and even used it for cultivation11”.
   The grain discovered during the excavation of Icheti’s tomb at Saqqara
was examined by Helbaek12. The material submitted to him consisted of two
whole spikes and twenty-six major portions of such. Helbaek remarks that
“On the whole it must be admitted that these spikes, to a superficial observa¬
tion, are extremely deceptive and, so far as size is concerned, suggestive of
Einkorn. This impression does not, however, stand up to a close morpho¬
logical scutiny13.” After close examination and comparison, he concluded that
the alleged einkorn among the Icheti wheat was emmer, T. dicoccum. “In
spite of a certain dimensional conformity with recent einkorn, the morpho¬
logical discrepancies are too great for referring any part of the find to this
species14.”
   In the light of his examination of the Icheti wheat, Helbaek went on to
suggest that the einkorn from the Zoser galleries was also emmer, and cast
doubt on the identification of the Omari specimen as einkorn15. These doubts
were later confirmed when he examined (1955) the Zoser material and the
Omari spike. His view, therefore, is that “no valid evidence for the presence
of einkorn in Egypt has so far been offered16”.
   Authenticated finds of any species of naked wheat prior to the Graeco-
Roman period are extremely rare, and most authorities are now inclined to
regard only finds from that period as certainly identified naked wheats. A
number of finds of naked wheat have from time to time been reported17, but
most of them have proved on further examination to be threshed emmer.
   Among the material obtained from two of the Fayum neolithic granary
pits excavated by Caton-Thompson were some charred grains which Percival
(alone of the three cereal specialists who examined them) identified as
 Triticum vulgare (i.e. T. aestivum), bread wheat18. These determinations were
greeted with some scepticism, and subsequently Percival modified his
opinion. He stated19 that the straw from which the lining of the pits was
                                       A note on cereals in ancient Egypt    133


derived came from a wheat, and that although it was not possible to be quite
certain of the kind, “it is unlike any form of Emmer and resembles the straw
of Bread wheat”. Kew, however, reported that the particular wheat from
which the straw lining was derived could not be identified. Of the carbonized
grains Percival says they were “naked grains of a kind of wheat” and that “in
general form and size” they “resemble grains of some forms of Bread wheat,
but in some points they differ slightly from modern Bread wheats”. Among
the material he examined were “one or two spikelets with chaff resembling
that of emmer, and containing carbonized, blunt-ended grains somewhat like
those of T. vulgare; the significance of these finds I cannot appraise”. Percival
did “not feel justified in naming these carbonized grains as grains of T. vulgare
with certainty”. “I . . . hesitate to commit myself to the naming of these
(i.e. the straw and carbonized grain) as undoubtedly specimens of T. vulgare.”
   It certainly seems very unlikely that the Fayum Neolithic people were
growing bread wheat, which was apparently unknown to the neolithic people
at Merimde, the vast bulk of the grain found at that site being emmer. Bread
wheat was likewise unknown in the predynastic period and in dynastic times—
notwithstanding Unger’s claim to have identified grains of a naked wheat,
which he termed T. vulgare var. antiquorum, in mud bricks from one of the
Dahshur pyramids and from the town ruins at Tell el-Maskhuta (Nineteenth
Dynasty).
   However, a few years ago evidence did come to light for the existence of
naked wheat in neolithic Egypt. At the middle and late neolithic sites of
Merimde-Beni Salame and El-Omari were found a number of carbonized
grains which were identified by Helbaek20 as club wheat, T. compactum, a
hexaploid naked wheat. “With their greater thickness, blunt and rounded
shape, and the steeply placed embryo”, they differed sharply from emmer
grains found at these sites; and Helbaek thinks that “for all the distortion
caused by the process of carbonization Emmer grains would not arrive at this
shape, and it seems justifiable to list Club wheat among the cultivated plants
of Neolithic Egypt21.”
   At both Merimde and El-Omari, however, the grains of club wheat formed
but a small proportion of the grain found, the bulk of it being emmer and
hulled barley. It seems, therefore, that “Club wheat was not intentionally
cultivated, but occurred as a stray occupant of the field. ... It was probably
brought to Egypt together with the other crop plants at the beginning of
agriculture, but since it is never encountered in deposits of later periods
previous to the Graeco-Roman epoch, it was obviously a race that did not
thrive in the local conditions obtaining there22.”
   Turning now to the dynastic period, it may be noted that Schulz23 con¬
sidered as certain the identification as naked wheat of grains of Twelfth
Dynasty date found by Schweinfurth at Dra Abu el-Naga, Thebes, and of
others from the tomb of Rahotep at Meir, also Twelfth Dynasty.
    Schiemann24 thought she recognized T. durum, macaroni wheat, a
134   Part H Domestication and exploitation of plants    DIXON


 tetraploid naked species, in material of Eighteenth Dynasty date from Deir
 el-Medineh, but owing to the smallness of the sample, the determination was
 only provisional.
    From Graeco-Roman times a number of certainly identified examples of
 T. durum are known25 and it is not until this period that the species can be
 considered as established in Egypt.
    Barley has been used as a foodstuff in Egypt since very early times. Exam¬
ination of the abdominal contents of a large number of bodies of predynastic
date from Naga ed-Der in Upper Egypt showed that almost every one con¬
tained husks of barley. Barley frequently occurs in tombs and settlements of all
periods, usually alongside emmer. The barley grown in Egypt anciently
seems to have been much the same as that grown at the present time.
   According to Jackson26, the material from the neolithic granary pits
excavated by Caton-Thompson in the Fayum consisted of a mixture of two-
rowed and six-rowed types of barley. Most finds of ancient Egyptian barley
fall within the group of four-rowed and six-rowed types. According to Mrs.
Tackholm, who lists all the finds of four- and six-rowed barley known up to
194027, the red, white, and black barleys mentioned in the Egyptian texts
were probably four-rowed forms.
   Reference has already been made to the wooden and ivory carvings of
cereal spikes found in the tomb of Djer at Abydos by Petrie, who described
them as representing “bearded barley”. As already noted, however, they
probably represent emmer wheat. An entire barley plant was found in the
coffin of Amenophis I at Dra Abu el-Naga.
   According to Tackholm, naked barley was known in ancient Egypt, the
oldest example being grains from the neolithic settlements in the Fayum
excavated by Caton-Thompson28. Neither chaff nor spikelets have been dis¬
covered, and consequently it has not been possible to determine to which of
the three known types of naked barley the grains belong, viz. Hordeum
distichum var. nudum, H. tetrastichum var. coeleste, or H. hexastichum var.
revelatum. Helbaek, however, says that naked barley does not occur in
ancient Egypt: “Many reports on Egyptian grain postulate the occurrence of
Naked barley in prehistoric and dynastic deposits. No documentation has ever
been published, and according to my experience, which includes examination
of many grain finds, the postulate is unfounded29.”
   Among the barley finds listed by Tackholm are a number of instances of
germinated barley. According to some, this was used for beer-making, but as
we shall see later, Nims thinks that malt may also have served as a primary
food in addition to being used in making beer. Others, however, think that the
barley was germinated exclusively for funerary rites. Loret30, for example,
describes a hollow pyramid model, now in the museum at Florence, con¬
taining germinated barley along with a picture of Osiris, and he points out
that the germination of the barley figured in the funeral rites of the month of
Khoiak in memory of Osiris’s death.
                                       A note on cereals in ancient Egypt   135


   During the Eighteenth Dynasty the objects known as “Osiris-beds” occur
in tombs. For example, in the so-called “Treasury” in the tomb of Tut‘an-
khamun was a “huge black oblong box containing a figure of Osiris swathed in
linen”. This “Osiris-bed” or “germinated figure of Osiris” consists of a
wooden frame moulded in the form of this deity, hollowed out, lined with
linen, filled with Nile silt, and planted with barley31. This was moistened, the
grain germinated, and the inanimate form became green and living—thus
symbolizing the resurrection of Osiris, and of course of the deceased. The life-
size effigy found in Tuffankhamun’s tomb was completely bandaged in the
same way as a mummy.
   Other examples of “Osiris-beds” with germinated barley are known: two
were found in the tomb of Yuya and Thuyu, measuring 1-63 m. and 173 m.
respectively in length32. Another specimen, 178 m. long and 68 cm. wide,
was found in the tomb of Mahirper at Thebes33. In the Cairo Museum is an
empty specimen from the tomb of Horemheb34, and in the Egyptian Museum
at Stockholm is a small “Osiris-bed”, of unknown date, dug in a brick about
25 cm. long and filled with germinated barley35.
   Possibly a necklace of germinated barley found by Maspero on the
mummy of Kent at Sheikh ‘Abd el Qurnah (Dyn. 20) also symbolized
resurrection36.
   Despite Unger’s claim37 to have recognized some ancient Egyptian repre¬
sentations as dura. Sorghum vulgare, this cereal has not been identified on the
monuments, not has its grain been found in a Pharaonic context. In the
Agricultural Museum in Cairo is a panicle of dura said to have been found at
Gebelein, but Mrs. Tackholm remarks on its rather fresh appearance38. In
the Botanical Museum at Berlin-Dahlem was a piece of culm labelled Sorghum
vulgare Pers. said to have come from the tomb of Nib-ari( ?), Valley of the
Kings, Thebes, Eighteenth Dynasty; no collector is indicated39. Unger40
states that dura stems were found together with papyrus at Saqqara and that
Rosellini found dura grains at Thebes, the latter of which were said to have
been determined by a Dr. Hannerd. Both records, however, are very dubious,
and the position at present therefore is that there is no evidence that dura was
cultivated in Pharaonic Egypt.
   Schweinfurth was probably correct in suggesting that it was not cultivated
in Egypt before the Roman-Byzantine period; and the only authentic ancient
instances of dura grain seem to be those found by de Garis Davies in the
Coptic Monastery of Cyriacus at Thebes, dating from the sixth to seventh
centuries a.d. These were determined by Schweinfurth41.
   Although Pennisetum typhoideum (pearl or bulrush millet), Setaria italica,
Panicum miliaceum (proso-millet, or broom corn millet), and Echinochloa
frumentacea all occur in Egypt at the present day, not one of them has been
identified among the ancient plant remains. A caryopis without seed found by
Unger in a mud-brick from the town-wall of El Kab42 probably belongs to a
Panicum species (the brick is said, though on what grounds is not clear, to be
6—DOPAA   *   *
136   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     DIXON


probably of Second Intermediate date), but apart from this, no species of
Panicum is known from ancient Egypt.
   The only species of Setaria so far reported from ancient times is S. verti-
cillata which occurs at the present day as a weed in gardens, cultivated ground,
and waste places. In the Museum at Kew is a well-preserved specimen of this
species with a complete panicle, which was found in a flower garland exca¬
vated by Petrie at El Lahun. According to Mrs. Tackholm it is probably
Twelfth Dynasty, though there is no date on the accompanying label43.
   The only species of Echinochloa known from ancient Egypt is E. colonum,
grains of which were identified by Netolitzky among the intestinal contents of
some predynastic bodies excavated by Reisner at Naga ed-Der44. Judging by
the quantity and purity of the grains, it is perhaps possible that at that time
the plant was cultivated locally as a cereal.
   It would appear reasonable to suppose that the rice-plant may have been
known to the inhabitants of the Lower Nile Valley, where suitable conditions
for its growth existed in the swamps of Upper Egypt and especially the
Delta.
   In 1752 Count de Caylus45, a member of the Academie des Belles-Lettres,
gave an account of a large bronze figure of Osiris in his possession. The
figure, he says, was coated with a thin layer of gilded plaster; intermixed with
the plaster as a binder, were rice stalks. De Caylus was not alone in his belief
that the straws came from the rice plant; some years earlier, in 1739, the
figure had also been examined by a M. de Bose, another Academician, who
arrived at the same conclusion.
   The present location of the statuette is unknown, nor is it possible to date it
very closely on the basis of de Caylus’s illustration. The base, and therefore
any inscription it may have borne, was missing. The piece could as well be
Saite or Ptolemaic.
   Daressy46 was inclined to accept the findings of the two eighteenth-century
savants; Tackholm, on the other hand, thinks the identification as rice very
unlikely47. Whatever the truth of the matter, apart from this one alleged case,
rice has not been found in connection with ancient Egypt. It does not occur
in the tombs and no representations have been recognized on the monuments.
It is not mentioned in the texts and its Coptic name is identical with and
clearly derived from the Arabic el arouz. It seems clear that rice was
not cultivated in Egypt until some time after the Arab conquest of the
country.
   However, this is not to say the Egyptians of Pharaonic times could not have
known of the rice plant or its grains; they may well have known about rice,
though from what source they might have derived their knowledge and
whether the rice was wild or cultivated would be a matter of conjecture. What
is clear, on present evidence, is that the plant was not cultivated in Pharaonic
Egypt. The explanation could be that by the time the Egyptians became
acquainted with rice, whenever that may have been, they had already been
                                       A note on cereals in ancient Egypt   137


growing wheat and barley for a long time and were perfectly satisfied with
these crops, which are in fact much more nutritious than rice, which has the
additional disadvantage that it cannot be made into flour.



      Indirect evidence
Linguistic evidence may often furnish information not supplied by the
archaeological material. A good example (though not a cereal) is the case of
the chick pea or Bengal gram (Cicer arietinum), which has been cultivated for
centuries in India, the Near East, and southern Europe. The archaeological
evidence for the cultivation of this species in ancient Egypt seems to be
extremely meagre48. Examination of the linguistic evidence, however, shows
that C. arietinum was cultivated in the Nile Valley at least as far back as the
New Kingdom. Among a number of plants listed in a school text49 of this
time is one called in Egyptian hrw-bik, fit. “falcon-faces”, and a comparison
of the chick pea, with its “hook” or “beak”, with Egyptian representations
of hawks’ heads puts the identification beyond all doubt (PI. v). Indeed, it
would be difficult to think of a more apt name50.
   Turning now to cereals, the word for “barley” was it, which occurs from
the First Dynasty onwards51. Frequently found are the expressions “Upper
Egyptian barley” and “Lower Egyptian barley52”, which probably refer to
the geographical provenance of the grain rather than to any botanical differ¬
ences. One may compare the market descriptions baladi beheiri “Lower
Egyptian” and baladi saidi “Upper Egyptian” applied at the present time to
the grain of Egyptian cone wheat, Triticum pyramidale, according to its
origin53. At a later date (Dynasty XX onwards) a compound expression
occurs quite commonly, viz. it-m-it, literally “barley as barley”. Two slightly
differing explanations of this term have been proposed: according to Cemy54,
“prices, especially small sums, were often expressed by means of equivalent
quantity of barley. In order to avoid this conception of the word ‘barley’ one
mostly said ‘barley as barley’ (i.e. ‘barley in the form of actual barley’) when
speaking of barley in natural” Gardiner55 suggests that by Ramesside times it
had in addition to its meaning “barley” acquired the more general meaning
of “com” (one may compare the use of hd — “silver” and “money in
general”). When it was desired to specify “barley”, as opposed to corn in
general, the term it-m-it was employed.
   Another common cereal name is bdt, later bty, which also occurs in the
First Dynasty56. It obviously cannot denote “barley”, the name for which, as
we have just seen, was it. In any case the two names occur alongside one
another on a First Dynasty seal-impression57. Nor can it denote “spelt” since
this is not attested archaeologically in Egyptian grain finds. Now it has been
noted that apart from a few stray instances of club wheat in neolithic sites,
all the grain deposits found in Egypt, from the neolithic period down to
138   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   DIXON


Roman times, consisted of emmer. There can be no doubt, therefore, that bdt
is the Egyptian name for this cereal.
   In a list of cereal names included in the Onomasticon of Amenope (Dynasty
XX) are seven different kinds of bty. Gardiner58 regarded the enumeration of
these seven kinds as showing that “bdt cannot be tied down to one single
botanical species, so that there may be some justification for the alternative
rendering ‘spelt’ that is often adopted”. Spelt, we repeat, is not attested from
Egypt. Of the seven kinds of bdt (bty) named, four are distinguished by their
colour, viz. “white”, “black”, “red”, and “orange-red”( ?)59. It seems clear
that Gardiner bases his view mainly on these varied colours, which doubtless
refer to some prominent or obvious feature of the bdt in question, most likely
the grain. These different colours, however, in no way tell against their all
being emmer. Emmer grains do vary in colour; according to Percival60, the
colour is chiefly white, red, or yellowish, or gradations thereof—pale red,
reddish-yellow, amber, and even (in some Abyssinian varieties) a deep
purple.
   In a discussion of Ramesside texts relating to the transport and taxation of
corn, Gardiner61 drew attention to “a remarkable habit of Egyptian scribes
applicable, not only to Ramesside times, but also to the Eighteenth Dynasty:
whenever black and red ink are both being used, red ink is employed for bdt-
wheat and black for it-m-it ‘barley’; though subsequently when both kinds of
grain are being added together as ss ‘corn’ red ink may be used62”. So firmly
rooted was this habit that it actually occurs in a mere story. Hence wherever
this contrast of colours occurs in connection with com, it is reasonable to
conclude that the black amount refers to barley, and the red amount to
emmer. Furthermore, since in these Ramesside texts discussed by Gardiner
the amounts written in black are both smaller and fewer than those in red,
most payments in corn, and especially tax-payments, were made in emmer,
not barley.
   During the Old and Middle Kingdoms the leading cereal was barley,
emmer being second, judging from the common expression it bdt “barley and
emmer”. This expression occurs still in the New Kingdom but the relative
importance of the two cereals was already reversed.
   From the Twenty-fifth Dynasty and through the Persian Period emmer was
the main cereal. For example, in the Adoption Stela of Nitokris, dating from
the reign of Psammetichus I, “3 khar of first-class emmer” are given to
Nitokris “from the temple of Rec-Atum in the Hek‘adje nome, . . . after it
has been offered in the (divine) presence, every day, and the god has been
satisfied therewith63”. The pre-eminence of emmer is likewise attested in the
Demotic papyrus from El-Hibeh, known as the “Petition of Peteesi” (Dem.
P. John Rylands IX), which dates from the reign of Darius I; as well as in
other Demotic papyri from this site64.
   Another word denoting some cereal is swt. While it appears to denote a
wheat of some kind, its precise meaning is not clear. If it be not a general
                                        A note on cereals in ancient Egypt    139


term for wheat, it is difficult to suggest what it could be. It was distinct from
it and bdt, for on a stela dated to year eight of Ramesses II, the king bragging
of his concern for the welfare of his workmen, says: “Upper Egypt continu¬
ally conveys for you to Lower Egypt and Lower Egypt conveys for you to
Upper Egypt, barley, emmer, szor-wheat, salt(?), and beans in immense
quantity65”. Tackholm66 says swt denoted naked wheat, but admits that such
wheats were of “but little importance in Egypt until the Ptolemaic period”.
As we have just seen, however, and as Mrs. Tackholm herself notes, swt
occurs very commonly from at least the Old Kingdom onwards. It cannot
denote macaroni wheat, T. durum, since as we have seen this is not attested in
Egypt until the Graeco-Roman period. Nor, it seems, can it denote einkom,
as Mrs. Tackholm suggested in a later publication67. Spelt, too, is ruled out.
Helbaek68 suggests that swt denotes “a variety of Emmer which perhaps while
alive was distinguished by some character that does not readily appear from
the material in the mummified state”. If so, we must wait for the morph¬
ologists to point out the finer distinctions in the emmer material already
recovered. There is, of course, the possibility that over the centuries swt
(earlier zwt) may have changed its meaning.
   A not uncommon term for some form of cereal is bs3, which occurs, along
with wheat and dates, on Second Dynasty stelae69. From the Third Dynasty
through to the Twelfth it appears as a label on granaries depicted on funerary
monuments. From the Fourth Dynasty dates usually occur in the same scenes,
often, though not always, in adjacent bins. The pairing of bs3 and dates occurs
also in four accounts in the Kahun papyri70, in an account in P. Boulaq 18,
and in the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus71. Despite this association with
dates, however, and the existence of the Coptic sBHHzy bBEz>/ meaning
“unripe figs”, there seems little doubt that bs3 was a cereal, not a fruit72. Thus
in two Old Kingdom tombs are scenes depicting men reaping a cereal which
looks somewhat like barley. Above the scenes is the legend “beer for he who
cuts the bs3”. Bs3 is mentioned in Old Kingdom tombs in bread- and beer¬
making scenes, but it is not quite certain with which activity the bs3 is to be
connected. In two tombs, however, is the legend “grinding bs3”. The verb
used, tiss, is known only from these examples, and according to the Worter-
buch, its cognate or derivative ts(3) “to crush” is used in connection with
grain only in the process of beer-making. Proof that bs3 was used in beer¬
making is afforded by the references in P. Math. Rhind 71 and in the above-
mentioned Moscow Mathematical Papyrus, where, as already noted, it is
associated with dates. There is apparently no technical objection to dates
having been used as an ingredient in beer.
   For reasons already given, bs3 cannot have been spelt. That it was an old
generic name for “barley” seems ruled out by the circumstance that in
various Old Kingdom representations of granaries it is shown together with
Upper Egyptian barley and Lower Egyptian barley. In a review of Gardiner’s
discussion of the question73 Nims74 suggested that bs3 was a “word for any
140   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    DIXON


grain set aside for or specially prepared for beer-making” and that it might
mean “malt”. In a later article on the bread and beer problems of the Moscow
Mathematical Papyrus, he cites75 as additional support for his view Oppen-
heim’s study of brewing in Mesopotamia76 in which the latter shows that malt
was used there from the Sumerian period onwards, and served as a primary
food as well as for brewing. In view of the fact that malt (sprouted barley) has
been found in Egyptian tombs, Nims suggests that a similar development
probably took place also in Egypt77. The occurrence on Second Dynasty
stelae of wheat, dates, and malt (bs3) is an indication, according to Nims, of
the use of malt as a primary food. He cites too an inscription in the tomb of
Neferhotep at Thebes, Eighteenth Dynasty, which refers to the making of an
“Osiris-bed”, i.e. a seed-bed in the form of that deity. The inscription runs:
“4th month of the Inundation, day 19. The day of moistening the bs3 and
spreading out the bed of Osiris NN78.” In the Moscow Papyrus the bs3
mentioned in connection with the beer problems would not be a new element,
but “only Upper Egyptian barley which has been ‘sprouted’ or ‘malted’ in
preparation for brewing79”.80



      Notes
       1 A much fuller treatment will appear in the author’s The Food Plants of
         Pharaonic Egypt (in preparation) and references here have therefore been
         kept to a minimum.
       2 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). Flora of Egypt, 1. Cairo, pp. 242-6.
       3 Percival, J. (1921). The Wheat Plant. London, pp. 186-7.
       4 Petrie, W. M. F. (1901). The Royal Tombs of the Earliest Dynasties, Part
         II. London, p. 23; pis. 5, 16; 6, 17 = pi. 34, 82-3.
       5 Debono, F. (1948). El Omari (pres d’Helouan). Expose sommaire sur les
         campagnes des fouilles 1943-1944 et 1948, Annales du Service des Anti-
         quites de VEgypte, 48, p. 568 and pis. 7, 2.
       6 Lauer, J.-Ph., Tackholm, V. Laurent, Aberg, E. (1951). Les Plantes
         decouvertes dans les souterrains de l’enceinte du roi Zoser a Saqqara
         (Hie Dynastie), Bull, de VInstitut d’Egypte, 32, p. 127.
       7 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). ibid.
       8 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). ibid.
       9 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). op. cit. pp. 127-8.
      10 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). op. cit. pp. 156-7.
      11 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). op. cit. p. 157.
      12 Helbaek, H. (1953). Queen Icheti’s Wheat. A Contribution to the Study of
         Early Dynastic Emmer of Egypt [Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes
         Selskab, Biologiske Meddelelser, bind 21, 8]. Copenhagen.
      13 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit. p. 6.
      14 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit. p. 10.
      15 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit. p. 11.
      16 Helbaek, H. (1955). Ancient Egyptian Wheats, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 21,
         pp. 94-95- .
      17 References in Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 254.
      18 Caton-Thompson, G. and Gardner, E. W. (1934). The Desert Fayum.
         London, pp. 46-7.
      19 Caton-Thompson, G. and Gardner, E. W. (1934). ibid.
                                   A note on cereals in ancient Egypt     141


20 Helbaek, H. (1955). op. tit. pp. 93-4.
21 Helbaek, H. (1955). op. tit. p. 94.
22 Helbaek, H. (1955). ibid.
23 Reference in Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 254.
24 Reference in Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). ibid.
25 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. pp. 254-5.
26 In Caton-Thompson, G. and Gardner, E. W. (1934). op. cit. p. 48.
27 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. pp. 287-92.
28 Percival, J. (1936). Cereals of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, Nature,
   Lond., 138, pp. 271-272.
29 Helbaek, H. (1959). Domestication of food plants in the Old World,
   Science, 130, No. 3372,pp. 6 and 8, n. 29.
30 Loret, V. (1892). La Flore Pharaonique. 2nd Edit. Paris, p. 24.
31 Carter, H. (1933). The Tomb of Tut. Ankh. Amen, III. London, p. 61 and
   pi. 64.
32 Quibell, J. E. (1908). Tomb ofYuaa and Thuiu. Cairo, pp. 35-6 Nos.
   51022-3.
33 Daressy, G. (1902). Fouilles de la Vallee des Rois. Cairo, pp. 25-6, pi. 7,
   No. 24061; cf. p. 170, Nos. 24664-5, 24667 (from the tomb*of Amenophis
   II).
34 Anon. (1934). The Egyptian Museum, Cairo. A Brief Description of the
   Principal Monuments. Cairo, p. 76 (No. 3840. B).
35 Determined by V. Tackholm.
36 Schweinfurth, G. (1887). Die letzten botanischen Entdeckungen in den
   Grabern Agyptens, Botanische Jahrbucher fur Systematik, Pflanzen-
   geschichte und Pflanzengeographie, herausg. von A. Engler, 8, p. 12.
37 Unger, F. (i860). Botanische Streifziige auf dem Gebiet der Cultur-
   geschichte, Sitzungsberichte der Kaiser lichen Akademie der Wissenschaften
   in Wien, Math.-Naturwissenschf. Classe, 38.
38 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit., p. 537.
39 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). ibid.
40 Unger, F. (i860), ibid.
41 Winlock, H. E. and W. E. Crum. (1926). The Monastery of Epiphanius at
    Thebes. I. New York. p. 61.
42 Unger, F. (1862). Botanische Streifziige auf dem Gebiete der Cultur-
   geschichte. V. Inhalt eines alten agyptisches Ziegels an organischen
   Korpern, Sitzungsberichte der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in
    Wien, Math.-Naturwissenschf. Classe, 45. p. 81.
43 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 460. (Several other specimens with
   panicles were found in graves of the Christian period at Antinoe, c.
   fifth century A.D.)
44 Netolitzky, F. (1914). Die Hirse aus antiken Funden, Sitzungsberichte der
   Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Math.-Natur¬
   wissenschf., Klasse, 33, pp. 741, 755 (referred to here under the old name
   Panicum colonum L.).
45 Caylus, de (1752). Recueil d’antiquites Egyptiennes. Paris.
46 Daressy, G. (1922). Le Riz dans PEgypte Antique Bull, de VInstitut
   d’Egypte, 4, p. 37.
47 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 412.
48 Apart from one find of post-Pharaonic date (second to third century A.D.)
    and another of uncertain date mentioned by Gardener Wilkinson, I know
   of no published references to finds of C. arietinum in Egypt.
49 Papyrus Anastasi IV, 8, 10 = P. Lansing, 11, 5. English transl. in
    Caminos, R. (1954). Late Egyptian Miscellanies. London, pp. 164 and 410.
50 Keimer, L. (1929). “Falcon-face”, Ancient Egypt, 1929, pp. 47-8.
51 e.g. Emery, W. B. (1958). Great Tombs of the First Dynasty, III. London,
    p. 60, pis. 37, 18; 83, 3.
142   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants       DIXON


      52 cf. Sethe, K. (1907). Die Namen von Ober- und Unteragypten und die
         Bezeichnungen fiir Nord und Sud, Z. fur dgyptische Sprache und Alter-
         tumskunde, 44, p. 19.
      53 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 232.
      54 Cemy, J. (1934). Fluctuations in Grain Prices during the Twentieth
         Egyptian Dynasty, Archiv Orientalni, 6, p. 175, n. 1.
      55 Gardiner, A. H. (1941). Ramesside Texts relating to the Taxation and
         Transport of Corn, J. Egyptian Archaeology, 27, p. 24, n. 3.
      56 e.g. Emery, W. B. (1958). op. cit. p. 36.
      57 Emery, W. B. (1958). op. cit. p. 36, pis. 37, 18.
      58 Gardiner, A. H. (1947). Ancient Egyptian Onomastica II. Oxford, p. 222*.
      59 On the rendering “orange-red” for kt, see the discussion in Gardiner,
         A. H. (1947). °P- cit- PP- 222*—3* and the references there cited.
      60 Percival, J. (1921). op. cit. p. 191.
      61 Gardiner, A. H. (1941). op. cit. pp. 19-73.
      62 Gardiner, A. H. (1941). op. cit. pp. 26-7.
      63 Caminos, R. A. (1964). The Nitocris Adoption Stela, J. Egyptian Archae¬
         ology, 50, pp. 75-6.
      64 Griffith, F. LI. (1909). Catalogue of the Demotic Papyri in the John Rylands
         Library, Manchester, III. Manchester, p. 78, n. 11.
      65 Hamada, A. (1938). A stela from Manshiyet es-Sadr, Annales du Service,
         38, pp. 217-30.
      66 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 253.
      67 Lauer, J.-Ph., Tackholm, V. Laurent, Aberg, E. (1951). op. cit. p. 128.
      68 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit- P- 13.
      69 Saad, Z. Y. (1957). Ceiling Stelae in Second Dynasty Tombs. Cairo. Nos.
         15, 17, 18, 19; pis. 26, 21, 22, 23.
      70 Griffith, F. LI. (1898). Hieratic Papyri from Kahun and Gurob. London.
         Pis. 15, 66, 67; 18, 3, 4; 19, 3, 4-
      71 Nims, C. F. (1958). The bread and beer problems of the Moscow
         Mathematical Papyrus, J. Egyptian Archaeology, 44, pp. 56-65.
      72 Gardiner, A. H. (1947). op. cit. II. pp. 223*~4*.
      73 Gardiner, A. H. (1947). ibid.
      74 Nims, C. F. (1950). Egyptian catalogues of things, J. of Near Eastern
         Studies, 9, pp. 261 ff.
      75 Nims, C. F. (1958). op. cit. p. 63.
      76 Hartman, L. F. and Oppenheim, A. L. (1950). On beer and brewing
         techniques in Ancient Mesopotamia, J. Amer. Or. Soc., Suppl. 10.
      77 Nims, C. F. (1958). op. cit. p. 63.
      78 Nims, C. F. (1958). ibid, (quoted).
      79 Nims, C. F. (1958). ibid.
      80 Bs3, swt, and other cereals used in bread-making and brewing, are dis¬
         cussed in some detail by H. Wild in an article (1966, Brasserie et pani-
         fication au tombeau de Ti, Bull, de TInst. fr. d’Arch. orientale, 64, pp.
         95 ff.), which came to hand too late to be utilised in the foregoing paper.
         Mrs. Tackholm has since accepted Helbaek’s identification of the alleged
         einkorn from El-Omari and Saqqara as emmer (Personal communication
         and cf. Tackholm, V. (1964), Favaas Blomster, Stockholm).
      ARLETTE LEROI-GOURHAN

      Pollen grains of Gramineae and Cerealia from
      Shanidar and Zawi Chemi

Much work has been done which shows us the geographical distribution of the
wild grasses which are ancestral to cultivated cereals; these grasses are found
over vast areas in the Middle East, but we need more localized evidence and
especially their relation to prehistoric sites. The variation of their geographical
distribution during the Wurm climatic oscillations is still not known; most of
our information concerns the present although something is known about
their distribution during the last ten thousand years.
   Although both pollens and grains are found in prehistoric excavations,
it is only the latter which have been studied. Of course, in so far as they
are available at all, it is the grains and seeds which yield the more precise
information about species and evolution of cultivated types. However,
despite the difficulties of studying pollen, they can reveal vital information.
For a site which is clearly pre-agricultural, by its industry (Mousterian for
example) or by radiocarbon dating, it is only pollen analysis which can, except
in the most exceptional circumstances, suggest the existence of an ancient
“cereal type” in the pollen grains of wild grasses.
   Two different measurements allow us to divide grass pollens into different
types; the first being the diameter of the grain and the second, the external
diameter of the annulus (or ring) encircling the pore.
   1. Small grains, less than 40/x, on average from 20/x to 35/x, annulus
smaller than 8/x, generally 5^ to 6^; such grass pollens belong to wild species.
   2. Middle size grains from 40/z, to 45/1 (and even 50jjl), annulus reaching
io/x: “Cerealia type”; such grains comprise wild species, wild ancestors of
cultivated species and cultivated species.
   3. Grains larger than 50/x and annulus from io^ to 13^; most of these
belong to cultivated species which have been domesticated for some time.
The problem comes with the second group, for “Cerealia type” grain can be
either cultivated or wild. Inspection of their morphology can help to dis¬
tinguish between them, and can even differentiate species, but it can hardly
be used for old and fossil pollens1.
   If the “Cerealia type” pollens are found throughout a long pre- and early
144   Port II Domestication and exploitation of plants     LEROI-GOURHAN


agricultural sequence, it is difficult to establish the beginning of agriculture.
The inception of agriculture may be marked by an increase in the percentages
of “Cerealia types” or by the presence of very large types, but great difficulties
are involved in their study. In the Zeribar lake deposits, van Zeist has shown
that, in this region of Iran, “Cerealia type” pollens existed more than 20,000
years ago2.
  If, on the other hand, as at Shanidar in northern Iraq (see the excavations
by R. Solecki3), such “Cerealia type” pollens are absent or very rare during
pre-agricultural periods, there are two possible explanations. First, this may
be due simply to climatic fluctuations in the Zagros mountains during the
Wixrm glaciation in which the lowering in altitude of vegetational zones
excluded their growth. Similarly their later appearance may also be due to
natural causes (changes in temperature or dryness) during which the vegeta¬
tional zones were submitted to new variations. Second, the later appearance
of such pollens may be due to human agency associated with the diffusion of
agriculture. It seems that it is the latter explanation which appears to have
operated at Shanidar.



      Shanidar Cave
Palynological results were obtained from twenty-two samples from the
different occupation levels of Shanidar Cave. Despite the presence of a thinly
wooded environment (whose fluctuations have been used for assessing some
climatic variations), herbaceous plants are abundant throughout suggesting
steppe, savannah or steppe-park so that it has been possible to analyse them
throughout the stratigraphic sequence (even the earliest level). All the
Gramineae pollen grains have been measured (see Table 1).
  In all the samples from the Mousterian, the Baradostian (Upper Palaeo¬
lithic) and the mesolithic levels, the grain sizes are small, rarely reaching 38/x
and 8/k, for the annulus. There are only three exceptions where a pollen grain
exceeds 40/1 and the annulus 9ft. It therefore appears that grasses with large
pollen grains were not characteristic of the nearest local flora but they may
have occurred only rarely, or they may have existed at some distance from the
cave. Studies concerning the dispersal of grass pollen, which is anemophilous,
yielded some information. J. Heim has shown that, beyond a few kilometres
from the fields, the percentage of Cerealia pollens is very low4.
   There is only one sample from the lower part of the Proto-Neolithic level
and its exact stratigraphic context is not known. The pollen diagram from 1 m.
to the surface shows striking differences from those of lower levels, for there
are numerous “Cerealia type” pollens, a few of them exceeding 50ft. Although
there is a decrease in the tree pollen values, there is not sufficient evidence to
suggest a significant climatic change. But, as van Zeist has commented, the
introduction of new wild species (such as Aegilops) from a nearby area may
                                    Pollen grains of Gramineae and Cerealia          145

                                     SHANIDAR


                           Gramineae             “Cerealia type”
                        grain diam. <40^   grain diam. <40/t    >40^      Total nos. of
        Level            ann. diam. <8/t    ann. diam. >8ft      > 8ft      pollens

Recent (A)
  o-6o m.                     203                 73             36           364

Proto-Neolithic (Bi)
  0-50 m.                     212                 25             20           377
  0-70 m.                     128                 15             25           726
  1-oo m.                     215                 II             19           525
  Bottom                       36                  2               I          151

Mesolithic (B2)
 2-85 m.                       22                                              70

Baradostian
  3-00 m.                      20                                              61
  3-40 m.                       7                                              24
  3'75 m.                       4                                              25
  4-00 m.                      54                   1                         361

Mousterian
 4-25 m.                        7                                              36
 4-35 m.                        3                                              13
 6-30 m.                        3                                              10
 6-40 m.                        4                                              28
 7-30 m.                       10                                              66
 7-50 m.                       20                                              7i
 7-57 m.                       15                                  I            61
 Neanderth. IV                 22                                        min. 1816
 8'6o m.                       12                                              188
 9-65 m.                       18                                  I           107


Table 1       Wild Gramineae and “Cerealia type”; number of pollen grains.


possibly be due to minor climatic fluctuations; the possibility of a change
in the flora due to animal domestication must also be kept in mind. Yet the
sudden appearance of numerous large “Cerealia type” pollens seems to be
due to human action which, at Shanidar, could be the first evidence of
agriculture.



       Zawi Chemi

In her paper on the village site of Zawi Chemi (c. 4 kilometres from Shanidar
Cave), R. L. Solecki5 noted that throughout the whole of the main layer (B)
the same material culture (Proto-Neolithic) was found; a long occupation of
the site is suggested. Domesticated sheep appear late in the sequence and,
as polished and chipped celts occur only towards the top of the deposit, we
may suppose the evolution of the industry to have lasted perhaps for even a
few thousand years. Unfortunately the one carbon-14 date available
146      Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants        leroi-gourhan

(10,870 b.p.) was estimated from charcoal which came from a different area
from our samples.
   The Proto-Neolithic level is more than two metres thick in some parts of
the excavation and is covered by c. 0-50 m. of recent deposits. Here it is much
easier than at Shanidar to follow the botanical progression since we have
more than fifteen samples from the various sub-levels (see Table 2).

                                    ZAWI-CHEMI


                                 Gramineae            “Cerealia type”
                             grain diam. <40^   grain diam. <40/x    >40/x   Total nos.
            Level             ann. diam. <&n     ann. diam. >8/x     > 8/i   of pollens

Recent
  (Fi)   0-25 m.                     7                                          101
         0-25 m.                    55                                2        1226
         0-30 m.                    61                                2        2022
  (C4)(a)o-50 m.                     2                                           40

Proto-Neolithic
                   0-90 m.         no                        1    +   5         697
                   0-95 m.          12                       3    +   2         419
                   1-oo m.          6l                       3    +   4         556
  polished celts   1-20 m.         Il6                       2    +   2         422
              (C4) i-6o m.           6                                           86
  domestic sheep ? 1-70 m.          38                                          377
                   1-90 m.          84                       4    +   5         501
                   1-95 m.          29                       3                  705
                   2-05 m.          34                       4    +   1         632
              (C4) 2-15 m.          28                       2    +   4         241
                   2-20 m.          5i                       1    +   x         602
              (C4) 2-2i m.          13                                          376
                   2-35 m.          83                                          365
                   2-45 m.          22                                          X12


  (a) The samples without numbers are all from area B4.


Table 2     Wild Gramineae and “Cerealia type”; number of pollen grains.


   Throughout layer B, no change can be seen in the tree pollen group which
remains very low. There is a slight fluctuation in the composition of the
herbaceous pollens; Chenopodiaceae increase from the bottom to 1-95 m. at
which point they constitute 41% of the total pollen. Above this level they
decrease rapidly. Gramineae increase in percentage after the Chenopodiaceae
maximum. This change may be due either to human agency or to a variation
from a drier to a wetter climate.
   From the bottom until c. 2-20 m., the grass pollen grains are still small
(still no agriculture ?); above this, larger pollen grains appear, rarely exceed¬
ing 45/x, but with annulus as large as 8-5/2 or even 10jx. At 1-90 m., the per¬
centage of grass increases; there was only one pollen grain larger than 50/2
and this remains a unique specimen from the Zawi Chemi Proto-Neolithic.
In the higher sublevels of this main culture there is a series of large grains
                                    Pollen grains of Gramineae and Cerealia       147


as well as the small grains which characterized the beginning of the deposit;
this fact, and more especially the larger size of the annulus, suggest the
introduction of agriculture.
   The Proto-Neolithic level from Shanidar Cave, where similar artifacts are
found, appears to be somewhat more evolved—with respect to the pollens—
in its uppermost part. The percentage of grass pollen is higher and seems
undoubtedly due to the proximity of a cultivated field. The sizes of the pollen
grains are, on average, similar to those from the Proto-Neolithic of Zawi
Chemi, yet, with a low, although constant, proportion of grains exceeding
50^.




       Recent levels
The “recent” level at Shanidar gives us the surest example of agriculture;
c. 55% of the grass pollens are larger than 40/x or have a large annulus which
may reach as much as 12/x in diameter. Furthermore, some of them have a
thick exine or a strongly marked pitting. It is possible that this larger grain
size may have been due to improvement of locally cultivated varieties but it
seems also that it may be the result of the introduction of new species6.
   Not all recent levels yield many “Cerealia type” grains; at Zawi Chemi,
between 0-25 m. and 0-30 m., only four pollen grains of this type were found
among more than 3000 grains, while the Composites predominated. It is worth
noting J:hat the site is actually located in a wheat field, so that no, or very
little mixing could have taken place.
   A large number of pollen analyses are needed to shed light on several
outstanding problems concerning the Near East: e.g. the vegetational history
and its connection with fluctuations of temperature and precipitation during
the Wurm glaciation and the Holocene; the extent to which the distribution
of the wild ancestors of cereal species at the beginning of plant domestication
differed from their known present distribution; the evolution of pollens of
cultivated forms which should be investigated by a joint study of the pollens
and grains from Pre-ceramic and Early Neolithic sites.



       Notes
       1 Beug, H. J. (1961). Leitfaden der Pollenbestimmung. 1. Stuttgart.
       2 van Zeist, W. (1967). Late Quaternary vegetation history of western Iran,
         Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol., 2, pp. 301-11.
       3 Solecki, R. S. (1963). Prehistory in Shanidar valley, northern Iraq, Science,
         Jan. 18, 139, No. 1551, pp. 179-93-
       4 Heim, J. (1962). Recherches sur les relations entre la vegetation actuelle et
         le spectre pollinique recent dans les Ardennes beiges, Bull. Soc. R. Bot.
         Belgique, 96, pp. 5-92.
       5 Solecki, R. L. (1964). Zawi Chemi Shanidar, a post-pleistocene village site
148   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     leroi-GOURHAN


        in northern Iraq, Rep. Vlth Intern. Congr. Quatem. Warsaw, 1961, pp.
        405-512.
      6 W. R. Stanton has pointed out that the change in pollen size could be due
        to agronomic changes; the distance travelled by the pollen decreases with
        the larger size of grain, so larger pollens are only possible with a high
        density of planting. G. W. Dimbleby has pointed out that the maize pollens
        of c. 80,000 years ago are of the same order of size as today, as maize is
        self-pollinating; see Hawkes, J. G., this volume p. 27.
     J. M. RENFREW

     The archaeological evidence for the domestication of
     plants: methods and problems


     Introduction

During the past ten years a substantial quantity of cereal grains and seeds
have been recovered in excavations of the earliest neolithic village sites in the
Near East and South-east Europe. These plant remains, dating to before
5000 B.C., shed new light on the origins and development of plant domestica¬
tion in the Old World and are of the greatest interest to agricultural botanists
and plant geneticists as well as to prehistorians. Most of the palaeoethno-
botanical material from the Near East has been examined and identified by
Dr. Hans Helbaek (Copenhagen), and a glance at the references for this paper
will reveal the extent to which all students of these problems are indebted to
his work. Other early deposits chiefly in Southern Europe have been studied
by Dr. Maria Hopf, Dr. Willem van Zeist and by the present author.
  This paper sets out to make a complete and comprehensive survey of all
the finds of palaeoethnobotanical material so far published which comes from
sites dating to before 5000 b.c. in the Old World, and also includes several
hitherto unpublished finds examined by the author, belonging to this period.
It is proposed first to describe the nature of the material—preserved by
carbonization, as grain impressions or silica skeletons—and this will be
followed by an outline of the methods used for identification of the material.
Special reference will be made to the differences between wild and domesti¬
cated forms, and the extent to which these can be recognized in the palaeo¬
ethnobotanical material. It was thought useful to follow this with a catalogue of
the finds so far available, giving details of the material from each site, which
form the basis for this discussion. The finds thus set out will then be analysed
for each species found—giving the archaeological evidence for domestica¬
tion. Comparison of these results with modern theories of plant genetics
reveals various discrepancies and the problems raised will be considered.
150   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   RENFREW




      Methods

      The survival of the evidence


The palaeoethnobotanical material survives from the period of the beginnings
of agriculture in three different forms: as carbonized material, impressions in
mud-daub and coarse pot sherds, and as small fragments of silica skeletons in
ash and carbon detritus. (For a general discussion of these forms of preserva¬
tion see Helbaek1.)
   The bulk of the material we are considering was preserved by carbonization.
The grain and seeds were converted to carbon while more or less retaining
their characteristic shape as a result of overheating near a hearth, or in a
parching oven (the primitive glumed wheats in particular needed to be
parched before they could be threshed and winnowed satisfactorily2); or by a
house fire in the area in which they were stored. They did not become car¬
bonized by spontaneous combustion3. The carbonized material from these
early sites consists of whole spikelets of wheat (e.g. Hacilar) and barley (e.g.
Jarmo), spikelet forks of wheat (e.g. Ah Kosh), rachis fragments of naked
wheat (e.g. £atal Hiiyiik), and of barley (Ah Kosh), and carbonized grains
and seeds (e.g. £atal Hiiyiik and most of the early finds in Greece and
Bulgaria).
  Two important finds, however, were preserved as impressions in mud-daub
in the construction of walls and roofs of houses, where the mud had first been
mixed with straw and chaff (perhaps sweepings from the threshing floor). At
Jarmo impressions of wild and domesticated emmer wheat spikelets were
recovered from baked clay and mud-daub. Impressions form the chief
source of evidence for the Pre-Pottery Neolithic husbandry at Beidha, where
a primitive and transitional form of hulled two-row barley was the chief
species found. At Argissa-Maghula in Thessaly Dr. Maria Hopf found
impressions of einkorn and emmer wheats and hulled six-row barley. Im¬
pressions in pottery have also been found from this early period. In this case
the spikelets and grains became incorporated in the wet clay as the pot was
being built and were then burnt out when the vessel was fired, thus leaving a
perfect mould of the grain from which a latex cast can be obtained. Such
impressions of emmer wheat spikelets and internodes, and florets of hulled
barley were found in coarse ware sherds of phase A in the ‘Amuq.
  Occasionally associated with impressions of grain in mud-daub and coarse
sherds there occur silica skeletons of small fragments of the epidermis and
glumes which can be identified on microscopic examination. The cell walls of
the epidermis of grass seeds and those of some other plants contain silica
which is deposited during the growth of the cell. This silica remains when the
organic material disappears due to burning or to natural decay. When
embedded in mud-daub or mud bricks or objects of baked clay these silica
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   151


skeletons may survive indefinitely, forming an exact replica of the plant cell
and retaining all the characteristics of the walls and pits of the epidermis4. In
the ‘Amuq finds silica skeletons of the dorsal pale, the glume and an internode
of emmer wheat were found together with those of a wild oat pale and the
epidermis of rye grass5. Fragments of silica skeletons are also occasionally
found in deposits of ash and carbon detritus for example fragments of wheat
and barley epidermal cells were found at Jarmo6.

     Methods and problems of identification


The early plant remains are identified by a careful study of the minute details
of morphology preserved in the grains and seeds and comparison with the
corresponding parts of fresh plants of the same species. The examiner must
also be aware of the different forms of distortion which may occur due to the
form of preservation of the material. In all forms of preservation the tech¬
niques of identification are based solely on the correlation between the
morphology of the ancient grains and seeds with that of their modem counter¬
parts. Direct evidence for the structure of the chromosomes are not obtain¬
able7.
   The first plants to be domesticated by man in the Old World appear to have
been the cereals wheat and barley. In the period with which we are concerned
three species of wheat, Triticum monococcum, Triticum dicoccum, and Triticum
aestivum became established as fully domesticated crops, and both hulled and
naked varieties of two- and six-row barley were also grown. In Thessaly oats
and millet may also have come into cultivation at this period. Also present on
many of the early sites are various representatives of the pulses especially
peas, lentils and vetch, and although these have not been studied so intensively
it seems likely that peas and lentils at least had been domesticated by 5000
B.c. Another crop which falls outside the categories mentioned so far is flax
which appears to have come into cultivation in the Near East certainly before
the end of our period.

Wheat.    The earliest finds consist of the glumed diploid einkorn and tetra-
ploid emmer wheats and their wild ancestors; these can be shown to be
genetically more primitive than the naked hexaploid bread wheat and club
wheat which also occur before 5000 b.c.8 The chief difference between wild
and domesticated glume wheats lies in the fragility of the rachis; the wild
species have a britde rachis enabling individual spikelets to disarticulate on
ripening and thus disperse the seeds. The domestic forms of the glume wheats
also have a brittle rachis, but it tends not to break up into spikelets until
threshed. Thus it seems that the earliest farmers selected their seed grain from
those spikes which remained intact until the whole ear was ready for harvest¬
ing. Besides the brittleness of the rachis other features of the wild einkorn
T. boeoticum and wild emmer T. dicoccoides are the great size, coarseness and
152   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   RENFREW


extreme hairiness of their spikelets and their long ripening period, so that the
uppermost grains may have dispersed before the lower ones on the same spike
have ripened. In the case of wild einkorn two varieties are known: there is a
small single-grained race which is found chiefly in the Balkans and western
Anatolia, T. boeoticum ssp. aegilopoides, and a larger twin-grained variety
occurring in S. Turkey, Iraq, and Iran T. boeoticum ssp. thaoudar9. The spike
of the cultivated einkorn, T. monococcum, tends to be shorter and more com¬
pact than that of the wild species. The grains, though still pointed at both
ends, are shorter and broader than those of T. boeoticum10. Both single and
twin grained forms of T. monococcum occur on the early sites.
  Wild emmer differs from wild einkorn in being on the whole much
larger, and in having invariably two grains ripening per spikelet. The spike
is thus less compressed laterally. The glume has a single prominent keel
contrasting with the wild and cultivated forms of einkorn which have two
keels to their glumes11. Most forms have a very hairy rachis. Cultivated
emmer tends to have a more or less glabrous spike in contrast to T. dicoc-
coides, and the head is shorter, denser, and less hairy and the grains much
plumper than in the wild species12. Thus the wild wheat species may be
distinguished from each other and from their cultivated progeny. The chief
differences between cultivated einkorn and emmer grains may be briefly
summarized as follows: grains of einkorn tend to be very narrow indeed
averaging about 1-5-2 mm., and in the single-grained varieties they have a
rounded profile in both dorsal and ventral aspects. The grains of two-grained
einkorn are closer to those of emmer, being flattened ventrally, but are
distinguished by their shortness and narrowness. Caryopses of emmer are
plumper than those of einkorn and have a characteristic hollow in the ventral
aspect.
  The hexaploid wheats have no wild progenitor to correspond with T.
boeoticum or T. dicoccoides. They are derived from emmer probably through
crossing with a species of Aegilops13. The hexaploid wheats which concern us
here are the naked T. aestivum (bread wheat) and T. comp actum (club wheat).
They are distinguished from the foregoing cultivated species by having much
shorter, fatter, more rounded grains, with the greatest width near the embryo.
There is a marked difference in the spikelet fragments too—instead of form¬
ing a “fork” as in einkorn and emmer where the keels of the glumes and the
rachis intemode adhere firmly together as a single unit, bread and club
wheat spikelets break quite differently with the rachis segments adhering
together whilst the glumes and keels have invariably disintegrated14. The
grains of club wheat are shorter and plumper than those of bread wheat and
the rachis segments also tend to be shorter due to the denser ear form.


Barley.   The earliest cultivated barley found seems to belong to the two-row
variety and undoubtedly has derived from the wild Hordeum spontaneum. Both
wild and domesticated forms are found in the earliest deposits. The differences
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   153


between these forms are not very great. The domestic variety has a tough
rachis that does not break during threshing, whereas the wild form has a
brittle rachis breaking up into discreet spikelets on maturity each consisting
of one median fertile grain with a lateral sterile floret on either side. The
fragility of the rachis—the major distinctive feature of the wild two-row
barley—is only controlled by two genes15. In discussing the transitional forms
of two-row barley occurring at Beidha Helbaek states that the cultivated form
has larger grains16. The lateral florets of H. spontaneum are pedicellate and not
sessile as in cultivated varieties, and the pales are not wrinkled: these features
are found in the barley at Jarmo17.
   The Beidha finds, besides the transitional form of H. spontaneum which
showed signs of having been cultivated if it had not reached the point where '
it could be described as fully domesticated, also revealed a mutant of two-row
barley which must have arisen due to domestication—the naked form—but
there is no clear evidence as to the spikelet type18. The first indisputable
evidence of naked six-row barley comes from Aceramic Hacilar, but Helbaek
would like to consider all the early finds as belonging to this type19. The status
of the wild six-row barley, H. agriocrithon, in the origin of the six-row
domesticated form has been the subject of much controversy since its
discovery in Tibet (1938) and Palestine (1954). The question is which is the
more primitive condition, six- or two-row, or could they have evolved side by
side20? If as Zohary and others maintain the two-row variety is the most
primitive then the first demonstrable mutation in barley found in the
palaeoethnobotanical material is remarkably complex. The sterile lateral
florets became fertile at the same time as the pales lost their cohesion to the
caryopsis. This mutation made the grain completely dependent on man for
its reproduction since the primitive means of dispersal within the hulled
spikelet was now lost. The fact that rachis intemodes do not occur in the early
deposits, with the exception of Jarmo where several internodes were found
adhering together, suggests that the axis was no longer brittle.
   Naked barley is distinguished from the hulled form by having much wider
grains, which lack the longitudinal striations of the palea veins and have
minute transverse rippling of the surface. The six-row form is distinguished
by having distinctly twisted lateral grains, the twist being most noticeable in
the ventral aspect.
   Two other cereals may have come into cultivation at this early period
although both are represented by very few finds. They both occur on
Aceramic Neolithic sites in the fertile plain of Thessaly in Central Greece.

Broom corn millet. The wild ancestor of Panicum miliaceum is not certainly
known; Helbaek has postulated Panicum callosum Hochst., the Abyssinian
wild species, as a possibility21. The find from the Aceramic levels at Argissn-
Maghula22 is of carbonized grain measuring 1-9 X 1-9 X i-omm. which
corresponds with those for the cultivated form23.
154     Part H Domestication and exploitation of plants   RENFREW


Oats.   An exceptionally large oat grain was found in the Aceramic Neolithic
levels at Achilleion in Thessaly. Unfortunately the diagnostic lemma base,
and the point of insertion of the awn were broken away so that the species
cannot be ascertained. However the size of the grain 92 X 33 X 2-5 mm.
suggests a cultivated form cf. Avena sativa/Avena byzantina2i. It is interesting
to note in passing that the wild oat Avena ludoviciana has been identified at
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B Beidha25, and that wild oats (species not given) occur
in the Ali Kosh and Mohammad Jaffar phases at Alik Kosh26 and also in
‘Amuq A27.
   Besides the domestication of cereals it seems likely that some of the pulse
crops were beginning to come under cultivation before 5000 b.c.

Lentil.   The lentil is the most frequently found of the pulses on these early
sites. The domestic form Lens esculent a is probably derived from Lens
nigricans, and this latter form was found at Argissa28. It is not possible without
measurements to say whether the finds from Pre-Pottery B Jericho, Jarmo,
Aceramic Hacilar, Ceramic Hacilar and Tepe Sabz are wild or cultivated. The
Ghediki lentils were probably cultivated as they measured 4-1-3-2 X 3-5—3 3
mm.29 compared with 2-66 X 2-48 mm. at Argissa30. The two deposits of
lentils from Azmaska in Bulgaria contained small seeds averaging 2-7 X 2-4
mm. and must probably be considered wild31.

Peas.   The wild purple pea, Pisum elatius, is known from Aceramic Hacilar
and £atal Hiiyiik32 while on the other sites it is the field pea, Pisum sativum
var. arvensis, which is represented. It occurs at Pre-Pottery B Jericho, Jarmo,
£atal Hiiyuk, Can Hasan, Ghediki and Sesklo. Measurements of the peas
from the last three sites are available:

  Can Hasan       max. diam. 4-4 mm. length of hilum 1-9 mm.
  Ghediki         4-1-3-5 X 3-8-3‘4 X 3‘5-3'0 mm.
  Sesklo          4-2-37 X 3-5-29 x 3‘8-2-9 mm.

Vetch.   Although all the finds of vetch from these early sites probably
represent wild plants it is interesting to note that Vida ervilia which was later
cultivated, already occurs at (Jatal Hiiyuk33. Vida narbonensis, the ancestor of
the horse-bean, occurs, at Beidha34. The earliest record of cultivated horse-
bean, Vida faba, is from Pre-Pottery B Jericho. Other sites where vetches
have been found are Ah Kosh (Mohammad Jaffar Phase), Tepe Sabz, and
Jarmo.

Flax.    Finds of seeds of Linum usitatissimum occur on two sites within our
period: Tepe Sabz and Tell es-Sawwan. The one measurable seed from the
latter site was 4 mm. long and 2 4 mm. broad35.
              The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   155




     Catalogue of finds before 5000 B.c. of domesticated
     plants in the Near East and South-east Europe
The finds can be divided into the following regional groups: Iran and Iraq,
Zagros, Palestine, Syria, Anatolia, Greece and Bulgaria.

     I Iran and Iraq

1 Ali Kosh (Deh Luran plain, Iranian Khuzistan)

     (a) Bus Mordeh Phase 7500-6750 B.C.
        The plant remains obtained by Hole and Flannery using flotation
     techniques to recover the carbonized grain from the earliest level at the
     site, were identified by Helbaek, and a preliminary discussion appears
     in Helbaek36 and Hole and Flannery37. The following species have been
     identified: Triticum boeoticum38, T. monococcum39 represented by a few
     battered grains, T. dicoccumi0 small grains and spikelet forks, Hordeum
     spontaneum41, naked barley ?two-row42. Besides these cultivated
     species a number of wild pulses were collected: Medicago, Astragalus,
     and Trigonellai3.

     (b) Ali Kosh Phase 6750-6000 B.C.
       T. dicoccum and H. distichum are the chief crops in this phase; two
     grains of six-row barley were also found44. The same wild pulses were
     collected as in the previous phase and in addition the following wild
     grasses were represented: Aegilops, Lolium, wild oats and canary grass45.

     (c) Mohammad Jaffar Phase 6000-5500 B.C.
       Emmer wheat and hulled two-row barley remain the chief cultivated
     plants, and they are joined in the plant record by plantain, mallow, vetch,
     wild oat, and canary grass46. The detailed report on these finds is
     awaited with great interest.

2 Tepe Sabz (Deh Luran, Iranian Khuzistan)

     Sabz Phase 5500-5000 B.C.
       T. aestivumi?, hulled six-row barley48 and hulled two-row barley49
     are the cereals represented at this site, and “irrigated” flax is also
     represented50. The following pulses were found—lentil, vetch and
     vetchling51.

3 Tepe Guran (Luristan)
  The deposit of grain was found in a domed oven in a mud-walled house
156   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants      RENFREW


dating between 6200-5500 B.c. The grain was identified by Helbaek as
chiefly H. distichum with a few grains of H. spontaneum™.

4 Tell es-Sawwan (on the Middle Tigris in Iraq)
   The grain was found in a defensive moat 2 m. below its upper level, dating
from 5800-5600 b.c. Finds from this site are described in Helbaek53. T.
monococcum—a single grain, T. dicoccum—grains 6 3 mm. long and roughly
as wide as thick. T. aestivum: the grains were 4-5 mm. long and plumper than
the emmer grains. Naked six-row barley grains were 4-5 mm. long, rounded
and plump with a finely corrugated skin, and there were a few hulled six-row
grains also present. The grains of hulled two-row barley were 4 5—6-5 mm.
long. Three seeds of flax were also present: the only measurable grain was
4 mm. long and 2-4 mm. wide.

      II The Zagros

1 Jarmo (Iraqi Kurdistan)
   The grain comes from the early farming village dated to c. 6750 b.c.
Various wheats were found: T. aegilopoides (i.e. T. boeoticum ssp. aegilopoides),
“smaller type with convexly curved ventral and dorsal sides”54; T. mono¬
coccum, carbonized grains55, T. dicoccoides, impressions in clay66, “straight,
flat-bottomed” grains and spikelets57; T. dicoccum, spikelets (impressions)
illustrated by Helbaek58 and grains.
   Hordeum spontaneum made up the bulk of the find. The kernels were
hulled, straight and unwrinkled, some specimens consisting of the median
fertile floret with one of the lateral male florets attached59. The lateral florets
are not sessile as in modern two-row barley, but have a short pedicel. Inter¬
estingly, it appears from some axis portions, consisting of three internodes,
that the spike was not brittle as in the wild form, but had attained at least a
certain degree of toughness.
   The following pulses were also represented: field pea60; lentil61; and blue
vetchling62.
   Grains and fragments of the “sturdy” glumes of Aegilops sp. were also
identified.

2 Matarrah (Kurdish uplands)
  The finds are dated to the Hassunah period, c. 5750 b.c. Two species are
recorded: H. distichum, long straight barley grains, and impressions of two-
row spikes63; T. dicoccum64.

      Palestine


1 Beidha (Southern Jordan)
  The finds are from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic “B” village. T. dicoccum,
                The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   157


impressions of spikelets with glumes and curving keels (not straight as in the
wild species). Some spikelets were larger and coarse as in the wild form,
others small. The variation was considered typical of genetical transition65.
The carbonized grains varied in length from 5 to 10 mm.66
   H. spontaneum was found with grains of considerable size, exceeding that
of the wild species, but retaining the britde rachis67. Whole spikelets were
found with sterile laterals as well as fertile median grains68.
   Naked grains, with width/length index exceeding 0-50 were found69. The
softly rounded surface is devoid of longitudinal striations of palea veins, and
in one, the shell is minutely rippled, establishing that these are naked grains.
Since no two-row naked barley is known in antiquity, these are probably from
six-row barley70.
   The wild pulses collected include Vida narbonensis, Medicago and
Onobrychis crista-galli11.
  Amongst the weeds, the following grass species were noted: Aegilops sp.,
Lolium sp., and Avena ludoviciana72.


2 Jericho (Jordan valley)

     (a) Pre-Pottery Neolithic A
        In the earliest Pre-Pottery levels excavated by Dr. Kathleen Kenyon,
     Dr. Maria Hopf has identified the cultivated hulled two-row barley H.
     distichum and emmer wheat T. dicoccum.

     (1b) Pre-Pottery Neolithic B
        In this level Dr. Maria Hopf has identified H. distichum, T. mono-
     coccum and T. dicoccum among the cereals, and the pulse crops Pisum
     cf. sativum, Lens culinaris and Vida faba73.

      (c) Pottery Neolithic
        H. distichum, T. monococcum and T. dicoccum continue to be cultivated.


      Syria


1 lAmuq A (Plain of Antioch)
   Cereal remains were found as impressions and fragments of silica skeletons
in heavily chaff-tempered “coarse simple ware”, dated to c. 5750 b.c.
   Species found were T. dicoccum spikelet and intemode, the internode
measured 2 93 mm. from the lower tip to the articulation scar, and was
i-6o mm. wide just under the scar. The glume was 8-oo mm. long74. Hulled
barley was represented by a poorly preserved small floret, possibly a sterile
floret75. Oat, Avena sp., occurred as a silica skeleton of epidermal cells of
pales. Microscopic examination showed the cells to be sinuate walled, the
crests and waves being thickened with the connecting parts thin and fairly
158   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    RENFREW


straight. The isodiametric cells are lobed all round, which indicated that the
species here is not A. sativa, A. barbata, or A.fatua, since the cells are too
slender76. Also found were grains of Lolium sp. cf. gaudium.

2 Tell Mureybat (on bank of Euphrates, N. Syria)77
  During the excavations of the site by Dr. M. N. van Loon in 1964 and
1965 finds of carbonized seeds were made, which have been studied by
Dr. van Zeist and W. A. Casparie. The levels containing the seeds have
carbon-14 dates ranging from 8050 to 7542 b.c. Among the eighteen types of
seeds identified cultivated plants are not represented, but of interest to us are
seeds of wild einkorn and wild barley which were discovered. The wild
einkorn is the two-grained variety T. boeoticum ssp. thaoudar and there are
no examples of T. boeoticum ssp. aegilopoides.
  The grains measured:

  Length       4-83 mm. (3-8-6-0 mm.)
  Breadth      1-30 mm. (0-9-1-6 mm.)
  Thickness    1-33 mm. (1-0-1-7 mm.)

They are slender, spindle-shaped seeds showing the greatest width in the
middle of the grain, while the ends are more or less pointed.
  The wild barley H. spontaneum is represented by a small number of grains
which are rather flat on the dorsal side, with a comparatively small thickness
and more or less angular cross-section. The maximum width of the grain is in
the middle; it tapers to a narrow base and the width decreases only slightly
towards the apex. The following measurements were obtained for these
grains:

  Length       5-44 mm. (3-8-67 mm.)
  Breadth      1-89 mm. (I-5-2-I mm.)
  Thickness    1-26 mm. (ro-i-6 mm.)

3 Tell Ramad (Syria)78
   The Pre-Pottery Neolithic B levels of this site, excavated in 1963, have
yielded remains of cultivated plants. Hulled two-row barley H. distichum,
emmer wheat T. dicoccumy einkorn T. monococcum, and club wheat T.
compactum and lentil Lens culinaris have been identified by van Zeist and
S. Botteina.

      Anatolia


1 Catal Htiyiik (Konya Plain)
  Vast quantities of carbonized grain were found in levels VI to II, c. 5850-
5600 b.c. Helbaek has identified the following domesticated plants: T.
monococcum. The grains are small79 and it is the two-grained variety which
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   159


is represented80. T. dicoccum. This species is represented by grains and inter¬
nodes. The grains are of exceptionally large size81, measuring up to 9 mm. in
length and with extraordinary short, broad internodes and coarse heavy
glumes82. T. aestivum. The grains were identified thus as shorter, broader and
fatter than normal emmer spikelets. The rachis segments remain united and
the glumes and keels disintegrate, revealing a naked wheat rather than
hulled or glumed wheat83. H. spontaneum. Present as “introduced weed”84.
H. vulgare var. nudum. Present in “great volumes”85. The grains seem to
belong to compact spikes, of the small-grained variety86. Of the pulses, peas—
Pisum elatius and P. sativum var. arvensis, vetch—Vida noeana (a common
variety in this locality) and V. ervilia, were also present87.

2 Mersin (Cilicia)
  The material was brought back to England from Mersin by Prof. V. G.
Childe, and is now at Reading University. Its stratigraphical position is
not well documented, but it is considered to belong to a level not later than
the Hassunah period88. The material has been identified by Helbaek as
dense-eared hulled six-row barley, the first known occurrence of this form.

3 Aceramic Hacilar (Plain of Burdur, west-central Anatolia)
  The finds have been set at about 7000 b.c. T. boeoticum. Typical grains
were found sporadically in the deposits89; a small form of T. dicoccum90;
naked six-row barley. Also present were several pulses, P. elatius91, vetchling
and lentil92.

4 Late Neolithic or Chalcolithic Hacilar
   The precise context for this material has not been reported, but the date is
quoted as c. 5800-5000 b.c.
   T. monococcum. Large quantities, chiefly twin-grained93; T. dicoccum.
Whole carbonized spikelets practically intact94; T. aestivum. Rachis frag¬
ments95; naked six-row barley was much cultivated. Both two- and six-row
hulled forms of barley were also found. The only pulse crop so far recorded
from this phase is lentils96.

5 Can Hasan (Konya Plain)
  Two deposits of grain were found in neolithic level 5, dated c. 5250 b.c.
The first consisted of hulled six-row barley, with grains measuring 57 X
3-2 X 2-5 mm. (average), and Triticum sp., the grains being too fragmentary
for more specific identification. The other deposit consisted of Pisum sativum
var. arvensis, the field pea which measured average 4-4 mm. diameter
measured along the hilum, and the length of the hilum averaged 19 mm.97
160   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     RENFREW




      Greece


1 Knossos (Crete)
  Finds of grain come from Stratum X which dates to c. 6100 b.c. Naked
hexaploid wheat, emmer and barley are present but no further details are
given98.

2 Ghediki (E. Thessaly)
   Finds from the Aceramic Neolithic levels which probably date between
6000-5000 b.c. yielded T. monococcum, the single-grained form, measuring
5-5 x 2-0 X 3-0 mm.99; T. dicoccum, the chief cereal cultivated, average
L. 5-2, B. 2-9, T. 2-5 mm.100; H. distichum average L. 5 8, B. 2-9, T. 2-3 mm.101;
H. distichum var. nudum L. 6-o, B. 27, T. 2 0 mm.102 The pulses represented
are Pisum sp. measuring average 3 9 X 3-5 X 3 3 mm., Vida sp. 4-5 X 4-4 X
4-4 mm. and L. esculenta L. 3-8 X B. 3-4 mm.103

3 Achilleion (S. Thessaly)
  Finds in the Aceramic Neolithic levels, 6000-5000 b.c., comprise T.
dicoccum average L. 6 0, B. 2-6, T. 2 7 mm.104, and Avena sp. L. 9-2, B. 3-3,
T. 2-5 mm.105 It was identified on the basis of the hairy covering of the
caryopsis revealed where the lemma and palea were broken away. Unfortu¬
nately the pales were broken at diagnostic places so that the species could not
be ascertained.

4 Sesklo (S. E. Thessaly)
   Two deposits of carbonized grains were found in the Aceramic levels
(6000-5000 b.c.). One deposit consists of T. dicoccum (av. L. 57, B. 3-0, T.
2- 3 mm.), H. distichum L. 5-5, B. 3-1, T. 2-0 mm. and some peas Pisum sp.
3- 8 X 3-4 X 3-2 mm. The second deposit also contained Pisum sp. averaging
3-9 X 3-2 x 3-2 mm.106

5 Argissa Maghula (Central Thessaly)
   Finds from the Aceramic layers consist of both grain impressions and
carbonized grains dating 6000-5000 b.c. The species represented are T.
monococcum (carbonized grain measured 60 X 23 X 27 mm.107); grain
impression of two-grained einkorn 6-4 x 3-0 x (2-5) mm.108 and impressions
of spikelet forks measuring (10-2) X 4 8; (n o) X (3-8); (9-0) x (3-0);
(83) X (4-0); (8-o) x (4-0); (7-0) x (5-0) mm.109 T. dicoccum represented by
impressions of spikelet forks: (iro) X (6-2); (5-0) x (5-0); (7-2) x (4-5)
mm. H. vulgare carbonized grain measured (4-8) X 2-6 x 2-0 mm.110 and
grain impression (6-8) X (3-8) mm.111 “//. vulgare L. polystichum var.
tetrastichum” is represented by the impression of a rachis (18-0 x (2-5) mm.
of which a single rachis segment measures L. 3-5 mm.112 cf. Panicum
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   161


miliaceum was represented by a small rounded seed 1-9 x 1-9 X ro mm.
with the embryo broken away113. Lentils, L. nigricans, represent the only pulse
found. The carbonized seeds measured av. 2-66 x 2-48 X 17 mm., and they
are thought to belong to the wild species on the basis of their size114.

6 Nea Nikomedeia (W. Macedonia)
   Carbonized grain and grain impressions found at this Early Neolithic
village dated c. 6200 b.c. These finds are not yet published in detail but a
preliminary report in Rod den and Rodden115 indicates that wheat, barley and
lentils were cultivated. T. monococcum, T. dicoccum, H. vulgare var. nudum,
Lens culinaris, Pisum sativum and Vida ervilia have been identified by van
Zeist among the carbonized material.

     Bulgaria


1 Azmaska Moghila (Maritza valley)
   Finds from the Early Neolithic levels (Karanovo I culture) at this site
yielded grains dating to c. 5000 b.c. The following species were identified by
Dr. Maria Hopf in material sent to the Berlin Radiocarbon Laboratory116, T.
monococcum, T. dicoccum, and T. aestivum, and the pulses, Lathyrus cf. cicera,
and V. cf. angustifolia.
   Samples were also examined by the author in the Stara Zagora Museum
in the summer of 1966117. The following species were identified: T. mono¬
coccum L. 5-2, B. 2-0, T. 2 5 mm., T. dicoccum, spikelet forks and grains, the
latter measuring 6-6 x 3*1 X 27 mm., and L. nigricans, which formed the
bulk of two deposits, averaging 27 X 2-4 mm.

2 Karanovo (Maritza valley)
   The earliest levels of this site (Karanovo I culture dating c. 5000 B.c.)
yielded large quantities or carbonized grain. These included T. monococcum
(both single and twin-grained varieties): the single-grained type measures
av. L. 5-9, B. 21, T. 3-1 mm., and the twin-grained form L. 6-2, B. 2 0, T.
2-8 mm. T. dicoccum is represented by spikelet forks, glume fragments and
grains. The caryopses measured L. 66, B. 3-1, T. 2 8 mm.



      Tentative conclusions and problems arising from the
      results outlined above

     1 Wheat

(a) Triticum monococcum. Its wild ancestor T. boeoticum is recognized at Tell
Mureybat, Ali Kosh (Bus Mordeh phase), Jarmo, and Aceramic Hacilar. The
domesticated form T. monococcum is not found very widely nor in great
162   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     Renfrew


numbers on these early sites. However, it is found at Ali Kosh (Bus Mordeh
phase), Tell es-Sawwan, Jarmo, £atal Hiiyuk—where it is very abundant118—
and also at Late Neolithic Hacilar119. In Europe it is present at Ghediki and
Argissa in Thessaly and Tell Azmak and Karanovo in Bulgaria. It is inter¬
esting to note that the two-grained variety derived from T. boeoticum sp.
thaoudar occurs at £atal Hiiyiik, Hacilar120, Argissa121, and Karanovo I122.
Helbaek has postulated on this basis that “west-central Anatolia was the
primary centre of conscious development and selection of the cultivar and
that this selection took place about 6000 b.c.”123 This certainly seems likely
for the two-grained variety, but the single-grained species occurs nearly a
millennium earlier in Iran, at Ali Kosh where it is associated with its wild
ancestor.
   One problem arises from the modern distribution of wild einkom: the
small usually single-grained “race” is characteristic of the southern Balkans
and west Anatolia, whilst the larger usually twin-grained race T. boeoticum
sp. thaoudar is found in south Turkey, Iraq and Iran124. Harlan and Zohary
stress however that wild einkom seems to be most at home in south-east
Turkey on the basaltic cobble, e.g. on Karacadag. Granted that the twin¬
grained race may have been domesticated in south Anatolia and spread into
Europe from there as a cultivable crop, it seems that we must postulate a
single-grained T. boeoticum sp. aegilopoides growing further east than its
modem distribution to account for the finds at Ali Kosh and Jarmo, con¬
siderably older than the other deposits considered. This brings us up against
a problem that at present seems difficult to solve: what were the distributions
of the wild cereal grasses at the time of the earliest plant domestications ? This
problem is not wholly or satisfactorily answered by plotting modern distri¬
butions, although these may be taken to indicate the general area for con¬
sideration.

(b) Triticum dicoccum. Whereas einkorn is domesticated by cultivation and
selection from wild einkom, emmer is slightly more complex in its make-up.
The wild species T. dicoccoides has two genome components AA and BB—the
A genome being derived from einkom, and B possibly from a species of
Aegilops, possibly Ae. speltoides125. The chromosomes of hybrid AB would be
doubled—since the fourteen chromosome hybrid would be sterile as the
chromosomes of the “A” and “B” genomes would not pair normally126—
giving rise to a new tetraploid wild species T. dicoccoides with genomes AABB.
T. dicoccoides probably arose long before man began to domesticate plants in
the Old World. The area in which it arose probably lies somewhere close to
the overlap in the distribution of Ae. speltoides and T. boeoticum, i.e. in a
broad arc from the south-east shores of the Black Sea, through Eastern
Turkey and down the shores of the East Mediterranean as far as Mt. Carmel.
The most easterly point of this arc lies at the headwaters of the river
Tigris.
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   163


   Two races of wild emmer have been distinguished: that found in Turkey,
Iraq, Iran and the U.S.S.R. is never found in great abundance, but often
occurs associated with wild einkom and wild barley as a minor component of
the grassland flora in the lower oak-woodland belt127. This race is rather
small, and not much larger than wild einkorn. The other race distinguished
has a distribution centred on the Upper Jordan valley, and is remarkable for
its large size and robustness. It occurs in massive stands on basaltic and hard
limestone slopes. Harlan and Zohary postulate that this race, now found in
the Upper Jordan valley, was the ancestor of the modern tetraploid wheats,
and that the Turkish-Iraqi race was of little importance for the early domesti¬
cation of cereals. It has been shown that this Turkish-Iraqi race is closest to
 T. timopheevi, a half weed, half cultivated wheat of Soviet Georgia and
Armenia128. It is of interest to note that the only palaeoethnobotanical find of
T. dicoccoides so far is from Jarmo in the Zagros region of Iraqi Kurdistan,
while at Beidha in Southern Jordan no wild emmer is present. The chief crop
there seems to have been hulled two-row barley transitional between the wild
and domestic forms. The emmer at this site however shows great variation in
size suggesting that it represents a period of “genetical transition”129.
   Emmer is the most widely found of all the early domesticated cereals.
Among the sites at present under consideration it is present at all except
Tepe Sabz, Tepe Guran and Mersin. In the early deposits at Ali Kosh and
Aceramic Hacilar the grains are small but characteristic130, at Beidha the
grains range in length from 5-10 mm. At <^atal Hiiyiik the grains are large, up
to 9 mm., with short, broad intemodes to the spikelets and heavy glumes131.
In Thessaly the average length of carbonized emmer grains of the Aceramic
Neolithic ranges from 5-2 mm. (Ghediki) to 60 mm. (Achilleion)132. In the
Maritza valley of Bulgaria the average length is larger than in Greece133 at
Azmaska Moghila, 67 mm. and at Karanovo I, 6-8 mm.

(c) Triticum aestivum.   Unlike T. monococcum and T. dicoccum, Bread wheat
has no wild ancestor. Its genome complement AABBDD is derived from T.
dicoccoides/T. dicoccum (AABB) with another Aegilops species. This was
probably Ae. squarrosa as Riley has indicated134. He suggests, on the basis of
high frequency of Ae. squarrosa in sample of wheat at Chalus on the Caspian,
that the initial hybridization may well have occurred under conditions of
cultivation. “If this were so”, he continues, “the first hexaploid wheat may
have been a free-threshing type resembling T. aestivum.” On the other hand,
McFadden and Sears have synthesized the hulled hexaploid T. spelta from
T. dicoccoides and Ae. squarrosa135 and T. aestivum is thought to have arisen
either by gene mutation in T. spelta or through natural crossing of different
forms of T. spelta™. The archaeological evidence here strongly suggests that
T. aestivum arose in the Near East, Anatolia and South Europe without any
connection with T. spelta, an association not recorded even in later prehistory
from this area. The earliest find of the species is at £atal Hiiyiik, 5800-5600
164   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    RENFREW


B.C., closely followed by Late Neolithic Hacilar. Further east it occurs in the
find from Tell es-Sawwan, 5800-5600 B.C., and at Tepe Sabz from about
5200 b.c.137 The earliest occurrence in Europe at Knossos at about 6000 B.C.,
followed by Tell Azmak138. Even in Central Europe, where both bread and
spelt wheat occur in archaeological contexts, the spelt follows bread wheat by
about a thousand years.
   T. compactum, closely related to T. aestivum, is known from Tell Ramad in
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B levels.

      2 Barley

(a) Two-row barley (Hordeum distichum). All varieties of two-row barley
derive from H. spontaneum, the wild, hulled two-row form, which is chiefly
distributed at present in an arc stretching from the northern tip of the Red
Sea via Israel, Syria, South Turkey, North Iraq, and South-west Iran on the
Persian Gulf139. It is this wild form, showing some evidence of cultivation,
which occurs at Ah Kosh (Bus Mordeh phase), Tepe Guran, Jarmo, Beidha,
and (Jatal Hiiyiik. The Beidha find is perhaps the most interesting: tens of
thousands of impressions of this species were found. They are ascribed to
this wild species partly by virtue of the brittle rachis, but the grains are very
much larger than the normal wild form, so that Helbaek140 has spoken of
“cultivated wild barley”.
   H. spontaneum has been identified among the grains found at Tell Mureybat.
At Jarmo, H. spontaneum has been identified both from impressions and
carbonized remains. Here finds of rachis fragments with three internodes
joined together suggest that the axis was no longer brittle—as a result of
cultivation of selection. This feature allows us to describe the Jarmo barley
as the earliest “domesticated” two-row barley yet found. It still corresponds
to the wild H. spontaneum in that the lateral florets are pedicellate and not
sessile, and the pales are not wrinkled141.
   Fully domesticated hulled two-row barley occurs at many sites of slightly
later date: Ali Kosh (Ali Kosh and Mohammad Jaffar phases), Tepe Sabz,
Tepe Guran, Tell es-Sawwan, Matarrah, Late Neolithic Hacilar, Ghediki,
and Sesklo.
   It is interesting to note that another form, the naked variety of barley,
occurs in extremely early contexts (Ali Kosh in the Bus Mordeh phase and
Beidha as well as Ghediki in Thessaly). Naked barley does not occur wild and
thus these forms must be considered as domesticates. Helbaek states142 that
“there is no evidence for two-row naked barley in antiquity”, and so identifies
the Beidha and Ali Kosh specimens as six-row. This seems unlikely, however,
when the rest of the material with which they were found is hulled two-row
barley, albeit the wild form. The Ghediki grain was considered two-row on
the basis of a similar association. Only finds of the rachis segments with
adhering pales would solve this matter satisfactorily.
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   165


(b) Six-row barley (Hordeum vulgare).     The whole question of the origins of
six-row barley has been the subject of controversy since de Candolle and
Koernicke in the nineteenth century suggested that H. spontaneum might be
the ancestor of both the two- and six-row forms, although de Candolle also
suggested the possibility of a hypothetical wild six-row form which would
be the antecedent of the cultivated six-row form. Since then, allegedly wild
six-row barley has been found in Tibet, and in Palestine H. agriocrithon was
found in 1954. It has been accepted by many authorities as the long-sought
primitive, wild progenitor of cultivated barley143. No finds of H. agriocrithon
are yet reported from archaeological deposits.
   The earliest form of six-row barley yet found appears to be naked. A
curved (lateral) grain of naked six-row barley was found at Aceramic Hacilar,
and naked six-row barley occurs in great quantities at (Jatal Hiiyuk, c. 5600
B.C.144 It appears also at Tell es-Sawwan, c. 5800-5600 b.c.145 Thus it appears
(if we disregard the Ali Kosh and Beidha finds noted above) that naked
six-row barley comes into its own as a cultivated crop chiefly in Anatolia, and
that if it is derived from H. spontaneum the three mutations giving a firm
rachis, fertile lateral grains and naked caryopses had occurred as a con¬
sequence of domestication at least before 7000 b.c. (Aceramic Hacilar). Finds
of hulled six-row barley occur slightly later: at Ali Kosh (Ali Kosh phase).
Tell es-Sawwan, and Tepe Sabz in the Near East, Mersin, Late Neolithic
Hacilar and Can Hasan in Turkey, and Argissa-Maghula in Thessaly. This
again is curious, for if six-row barley was derived from the wild hulled H.
agriocrithon one might expect to find the hulled form domesticated even
earlier. This does not appear to be the case from the palaeoethnobotanical
material so far examined.
   So far the archaeological evidence supports the case for H. spontaneum as
the ancestor of both two- and six-row barleys. The domesticated two-row
barleys seem to have emerged first at Jarmo (hulled) and possibly at Beidha
(hulled) and in the Ali Kosh phase at Ali Kosh (naked). The hulled form was
widely cultivated from about 6000 b.c. in the Near East and Southern
Europe. The earliest six-row barley (naked form) appears in Anatolia around
7000 b.c. and was established in Thessaly after 6000 b.c. Hulled six-row
barley occurs by 6000 b.c. at Ali Kosh (Ali Kosh phase) and Argissa in
Thessaly. It is subsequently found at Tepe Sabz, Tell es-Sawwan, Mersin,
Late Neolithic Hacilar, and Can Hasan. It thus appears that there was no
significant time lag between the emergence of domesticated two- and six-row
forms, and that both occur, in their naked and hulled varieties, very shortly
after domestication.

     3 Broom corn or proso-millet (Panicum miliaceum)

Only one possible find of this species is known for the period in question. It
was from Argissa-Maghula146, with seeds measuring 1-9 X 1-9 X i-o mm.
166   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     RENFREW


   The wild ancestor of the species is not known147 although Helbaek has
suggested that the Abyssinian wild species Panicum callosum Hochst., which
closely resembles it morphologically, may be involved148. The earliest find
previously recorded was from the Jemdet Nasr period in Mesopotamia,
dated around 3000 b.c.149 This form of millet was widely grown in Central
Europe from around 2000 B.C.160

      4 Oat (Avena sp.)

Finds of wild oat grains are not unusual at these early sites—at Ali Kosh (Ali
Kosh and Mohammad Jaffar phases), Beidha, ‘Amuq A. Only at Beidha has
the species been identified, as Avena ludoviciana. The find at Achilleion
would normally have been considered wild, but for the exceptionally large
size of the caryopsis, measuring 9-2 X 3-3 X 2-5 mm. As the diagnostic parts
of the lemma were broken away, more precise identification was not possible.
But on size alone it looks as though tiiis might have been a domesticated form.
If so it is very much earlier than any other find. A. strigosa and A. sativa were
cultivated in central and northern Europe at the beginning of the first millen¬
nium B.c.151

      5 The pulses

(ci) Pea.  Finds of the field pea, Pisum sativum var. arvensis and the rough-
seeded purple pea, P. elatius, are quite common on these early sites. The
former is known from Jarmo, £atal Hiiytik, and Can Hasan, and is probably
the species represented in the Aceramic levels at Ghediki and Sesklo in
Thessaly. P. elatius is known chiefly from Hacilar, and in smaller quantity at
£atal Hiiyuk. Bertsch and Bertsch consider P. elatius as the wild species from
which the cultivated field and garden peas derive152. Whether any of these
finds can be considered fully domestic is an open question, but field peas
were certainly cultivated in the Late Neolithic of Europe153.

(b) Lentil.    The lentil is the most widely found form of pulse seed on these
early sites. It occurs at Jarmo and Tepe Sabz in the Near East, at Aceramic and
later Hacilar in Anatolia, at Ghediki, Argissa and Nea Nikomedeia in Greece,
and at Karanovo I and Tell Azmak in Bulgaria. The domestic form. Lens
esculenta, is probably derived from the wild L. nigricans, and is distinguished
from it by the larger size of its seeds. Hopf154 describes the Argissa finds as L.
nigricans on the basis of the size of the carbonized seeds, 2-66 X 2-48 X 17 mm.
The finds from Ghediki are larger (3-8 x 3-4 mm.) and may be domesticated.
At Tell Azmak, lentils formed the bulk of two sizeable deposits, but the seeds
measured only 27 x 2-4 mm. which suggests that they may not have been
domesticated.
                The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants    167

(c) Vetch. The early finds of vetch belong chiefly to wild species, but it is
interesting to note that Vida ervilia was already known at £atal Hiiyiik.
It became an important crop later in Anatolia and neighbouring regions155.
Unspecified vetch and vetchling are known from the Mohammad Jaffar phase
at Ali Kosh and the Sabz phase at Tepe Sabz. Blue vetchling was found at
Jarmo, and V. narbonensis at Beidha. V. noeana, a common weed in the
vicinity of £atal Hiiyiik was also found in the neolithic deposits besides V.
ervilia, and a large-seeded vetch was present in Aceramic levels at Ghediki in
Thessaly. It is interesting to note that the horse-bean, V. faba, was not culti¬
vated until later156 although its wild ancestor was present in the Beidha finds.

     6 Flax

Two finds of flax seeds are known from this early period, from Tell es-
Sawwan and Tepe Sabz. The former find contained a seed measuring
4-0 X 2-4 mm. corresponding to Linum usitatissimum, and comparing well
with the previous earliest finds from Arpachiyah and Tell Brak (seed length,
3-84 and 4-03 mm. respectively) reported by Helbaek157. Fibres from textiles
at £atal Hiiyiik have been identified variously as flax and wool, and in the
absence of any finds of seeds, the presence of flax at that site cannot yet be
regarded as established. The wild ancestor of flax, L. bienne, occurs naturally
in the Kurdish foothills, and it seems likely that it was domesticated in this
region, and subsequently spread into temperate Europe158. It is not possible
to say whether flax was first cultivated for its oily linseeds or for the fibres of
its stem.



       Conclusion

The finds discussed above comprise the evidence as it now stands which
bears on the domestication of the earliest crop plants of the Old World (see
Table 1). They provide a somewhat complex picture of early husbandry,
which cannot conveniently be summarized in a few words. The wide variety
of crops at many early sites over a large area is, however, an obvious feature.
  Many of the finds here listed have been reported only in a preliminary way,
and few of them illustrated in detail. We do not have full details and measure¬
ments of the earliest forms represented, and their publication will be of great
importance. More finds will be needed as well, before we can understand the
full range of variation between the wild species, on the one hand, and the
cultivated varieties on the other. As yet no systematic study of “intermediate”
forms has been possible, and the rather close similarity in some cases between
the domesticates and their prototypes offers little hope of documenting in
detail the process of domestication as fully as Mangelsdorf has been able to do
for maize.
7—DOPAA
168   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants                        RENFREW


   The complex picture of early plant husbandry documented by these finds
suggests that the “Early Neolithic” period which they represent was preceded
by a lengthy period of experimentation before these crops—which still form
the basis of our agriculture today—were finally selected and domesticated.
The great lack in our knowledge here arises from the absence, up to now, of
finds of crop plants from the period immediately preceding what we now
know as the “Early Neolithic”. Although there are indications that both the
Natufians and the Karim Shahir people were exploiting food plants, we do
not know what these were. Future finds, therefore, may not only fill in the
details of the outline picture already available for the “Early Neolithic”
period: they may set the beginnings of agriculture back a millennium, or
several millennia, earlier than present evidence allows. Undoubtedly the
most valuable step towards increasing our understanding of early agriculture



                                                                                             Hulled 6-row barley 1
                                            Wild Einkorn




                                                                        Naked 2-row barley
                                            Einkorn
                                            Wild Emmer
                                            Emmer
                                            Bread wheat

                                                                                             Naked 6-row barley            Millet
                                            Wild 2-row barley                                                                             Lentil
                                                                                                                                                   Flax
                                                                                                                     *->            as
                                                                                                                     as              V
                                            Hulled 2-row barley                                                      0              P-i   Vetch
           Sites              Dates—b.c.

Ali Kosh (B.M.)                7500-6750    X   X   —   X   —
                                                                X   —
                                                                        X?                   _           _           _     _        _     _   _ _
Ali Kosh (A.K.)                6750-6000    - - - X - - X               -                    X - Wd -                               -     -   -    -

Ali Kosh (M.J.)                6000-5600    - - - X - - X               -                    - - Wd - - - X —
Tepe Sabz (Sabz)               5500-5000    - - - - X - X               -                    X - - - - X X X
Tepe Guran                     6200-5500                        X X
Tell es-Sawwan                 5800-5600    - X - X X - X               -                    X X                     -     -        -     -   —
                                                                                                                                                   X
Tell Mureybat                  8050-7542    X                                                                                                 X    X
Tell Ramad                     c. 7000      - X     -   X C     -   X   —                    -           —           —     —        _     _
                                                                                                                                          X   _

Jericho, P.P. Neo.             c. 7000      -   X   -   X   -   -   X   —                    -           —           _     —
                                                                                                                                    X X X _
Beidha, P.P. Neo. B.           c. 7000      -   -   -   X   -   X   -   X?                   -           -           Wd —           — —
                                                                                                                                        X          _

Jarmo                          c. 6750      X X X X             X                                                                   X X X          —

Matarrah                       c. 5500
‘Amuq A                        c. 5750
Mersin, E. Neo.                c. 5750
Catal Hiiyiik, VI-II           5850-5600    -   X   —   X X     X   —   —                    —           X           —     _
                                                                                                                                    X     _
                                                                                                                                              X _
Aceramic Hacilar               c. 7000      X                                                                                       X     X   X    _
Ceramic Hacilar                5800-5000    -   X   —   X   X   —
                                                                    X   —
                                                                                             X X                     _     _        _ X _ _
Can Hasan, L. Neo.             c. 5250
Knossos, Stratum X             c. 6100      _   _   _
                                                        X X     _ B _                        _ __                    _     _              _   _
Aceramic Ghediki               c. 6-5000    -
                                                X   —   X   —   _
                                                                    X   X                    _ _                     _     _        X X X          _

Aceramic Sesklo                c. 6-5000
Aceramic Argissa               c. 6-5000    —
                                                X   —
                                                        X   —   _   _   _
                                                                                             X _                     _     X        _     X   _    _

Aceramic Achilleion            c. 6-5000
Nea Nikomedeia                 c. 6200
Karanovo I                     c. 5000
Azmaska Moghila, E. Neo.       c. 5000


W = Wheat unspecified      B = Barley unspecified       Wd = Wild form                                               C = Club wheat


Table i  Finds of domesticated plants and related species from the Near East
      and Europe before 5000 b.c.
                The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants        169

would be the excavation of more sites from this shadowy period from the
tenth to the eighth millennium B.C., and the application of flotation and other
techniques to recover such plant evidence as they may contain.
   None the less, we should not undervalue the great advance which has taken
place in our knowledge in the period, less than two decades, since Professor
R. J. Braidwood’s pioneering excavations at Jarmo. At first solely through the
work of Hans Helbaek, and more recently with that of other scientists also, our
knowledge of Early Neolithic plant husbandry has reached the stage that the
developments documented through the archaeological finds can be compared
(and sometimes contrasted) with the developments put forward on less
pragmatic grounds, by plant geneticists. These comparisons have already
proved very fruitful, to both disciplines, and it seems very likely that they will
lead, over the next few decades, to an agreed and perhaps fairly complete
understanding of the domestication of food plants in the Old World159.



           Notes

       1Helbaek, H. (1963). Palaeo-Ethnobotany, in Higgs, E. S. and Brothwell,
        D. R. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London, pp. 180-5.
      2 Harlan, J. R. (1967). A wild wheat harvest in Turkey, Archaeology, 20
        (3).
      3 Helbaek, H. (1952). Early crops in Southern England, Proc. Prehist. Soc.,
        18, pp. 194 ff.
      4 Helbaek, H. (i960). Cereals and Weed Grasses in phase A, in Braidwood,
        R. J. and Braidwood, L. J. Excavations in the Plain of Antioch, I., Appen¬
        dix II, Chicago, p. 540.
      5 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
      6 Helbaek, H. (1959). How farming began in the Old World, Archaeology,
        12, p. 188.
      7 Helbaek, H. (1966). Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and
        Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20, p. 350.
      8 Helbaek, H. (1960b). The Palaeoethnobotany of the Near East and
        Europe, in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. Prehistoric Investigations in
        Iraqi Kurdistan, Chicago, p. 104.
      9 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). The distribution of wild wheats and
        barleys, Science, 153, p. 1078.
     10 Peterson, R. F. (1965). Wheat. New York. pp. 10-12.
     11 Peterson, R. F. (1965). ibid.
     12 Peterson, R. F. (1965). ibid.
     13 Peterson, R. F. (1965). op. cit. p. 85.
     14 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. fig. 8, p. 356.
     15 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
     16 Helbaek, H. (1966b). Pre-Pottery Neolithic farming at Beidha, Palestine
        Exploration Quarterly, 98 (i), p. 62.
     17 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 108.
     18 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
     19 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
     20 Bell, G. D. H. (1965). The comparative phylogeny of the temperate
        cereals, in Hutchinson, Sir J. (ed.) Essays on Crop Plant Evolution, Cambridge.
     21 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 113.
170   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants      RENFREW


      22 Hopf, M. (1962). Bericht uber die Untersuchung von Samen und Holz-
         kohlenesten von der Argissa-Magula aus den prakeramischen bis mittel-
         bronzezeitlichen Schichten, in Milojcic, V., Boessneck, J., and Hopf, M.
         Die deutschen Ausgrabungen auf der Argissa-Magula in Thessalien. Bonn.
         p. 102.
      23 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). Geschichte unseres Kulturpflanzen.
         Stuttgart, p. 85.
      24 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). A report on recent finds of carbonized cereal grains
         and seeds from Prehistoric Thessaly, Thessalika, 5, p. 23.
      25 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      26 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The prehistory of southwestern
         Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp. 147 ff.
      27 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
      28 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 101 ff.
      29 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
      30 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
      31 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigation.
      32 Helbaek, H. (1964). First impressions of the £atal Hiiytik plant husbandry,
         Anatolian Studies, 14, p. 122.
      33 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
      34 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      35 Helbaek, H. (1965). Early Hassunan Vegetable at es-Sawwan near
         Samarra, Sumer, 20, pp. 45 f.
      36 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      37 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      38 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      39 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      40 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
      41 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 357.
      42 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      43 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      44 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid. Helbaek (1966) op. cit. p. 357.
      45 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      46 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      47 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 354.
      48 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 358 and fig. 12.
      49 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      50 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      51 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      52 Meldgaard, J., Mortensen, P. and Thrane, H. (1963). Excavations at
         Tepe Guran, Luristan, Acta Arch., 34, p. 112, n. 17.
      53 Helbaek, H. (1965). ibid.
      54 Helbaek, H. (1959b). Domestication of food plants in the Old World,
         Science, 130, pp. 365 ff.
      55 Helbaek, H. (1960b). ibid.; Helbaek, H. (1960c). Ecological effects of
         irrigation in Ancient Mesopotamia, Iraq, 22, pp. 186 ff.
      56 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      57 Helbaek, H. (1959). op. cit. p. 184.
      58 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
      59 Helbaek, H. (1959). op. cit. p. 187.
      60 Helbaek, H. (1959b). op. cit. fig. 8; Helbaek, H. (1959). op. cit. p. 189.
      61 Helbaek, H. (1959). ibid.
      62 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
      63 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 109.
      64 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
      65 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      66 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
          The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants    171

 67 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 68 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 69 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 70 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 71 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 72 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 73 For details of these finds, see Hopf, M., this volume, pp. 355-9.
 74 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
 75 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
 76 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
 77 van Zeist, W. and Casparie, W. A. (1968). Wild Einkorn, wheat and barley
    from Tell Mureybit in Northern Syria, Acta Bot. Neerl., 17 (i),pp. 44-53.
 78 van Zeist, W. and Botteina, S. (1966). Palaeobotanical investigations at
    Ramad, Annales Arch. Arabes Syriennes, 16, pp. 179-80.
 79 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
 80 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 351 and fig. 3.
 81 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
 82 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
 83 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 354 and fig. 6.
 84 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
 85 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 357.
 86 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
 87 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
 88 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
 89 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 90 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
 91 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
 92 Helbaek, H. (1966b). op. cit. p. 63.
 93 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 94 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 353.
 95 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. fig. 7.
 96 Helbaek, H. (1961). Late Bronze Age and Byzantine crops at Beycesultan
    in Anatolia, Anatolian Studies, 11, p. 82.
 97 Renfrew, J. M. (1968). A note on the neolithic grain from Can Hasan,
    Anatolian Studies.
 98 Evans, J. D. (1964). Excavations in the Neolithic settlement of Knossos
    1957-60, Part I, Annual Brit. Sch. Arch. Athens, 59, pp. 132 if. See
    identifications by Helbaek.
 99 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). op. cit. p. 22.
100 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
101 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
102 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
103 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). op. cit. p. 23.
104 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
105 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
106 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
107 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
108 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
109 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid,
no Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
in Rodden, R. J. and Rodden, J. M. (1964). A European link with £atal
    Hixytik: uncovering a seventh millennium settlement in Macedonia.
    Part I, Illustrated London News, nth April, pp. 565 ff.
112 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
113 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
114 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
115 Rodden, R. J. and Rodden, J. M. (1964). ibid.
172   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     RENFREW


      116 Kohl, G. and Quitta, H. (1966). Berlin Radiocarbon Measurements II,
          Radiocarbon, 8, pp. 27 If.
      117 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigation.
      118 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
      119 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      120 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      121 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
      122 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigations.
      123 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
      124 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
      125 Peterson, R. F. (1964). op. cit. p. 83.
      126 Peterson, R. F. (1965). ibid.
      127 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). op. cit. p. 1079.
      128 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
      129 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      130 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
      131 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      132 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
      133 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigations.
      134 Riley, R. (1965). Cytogenetics and the evolution of wheat, in Hutchinson,
          Sir J. op. cit. p. 106.
      135 Peterson, R. F. (1965). op. cit. p. 85.
      136 Peterson, R. F. (1965). op. cit. p. 100.
      137 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 354.
      138 Kohl, G. and Quitta, H. (1966). ibid.
      139 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). op. cit. p. 1075.
      140 Helbaek, H. (1966b). op. cit. p. 61.
      141 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 108.
      142 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 356 and fig. 8.
      143 Bell, G. D. H. (1965). op. cit. p. 84.
      144 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 356 and fig. 8.
      145 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
      146 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
      147 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). ibid.
      148 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 113.
      149 Helbaek, H. (1959b). op. cit. p. 371.
      150 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). op. cit. p. 90.
      151 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 114.
      152 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). op. cit. p. 165.
      153 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). op. cit. p. 168.
      154 Hopf. M. (1962). pp. 104-6.
      155 Helbaek, H. (1961). ibid.
      156 Helbaek, H. (1959b). op. cit. p. 371.
      157 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 193.
      158 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 114.
      159 The author gratefully acknowledges the help she received from Dr. D.
          Theochares (prehistoric grain from Thessaly), Professor D. Dimitrov,
          Dr. G. Georgiev, Dr. Mikov, and the Director of the Stara Zagora
          Museum for the earliest Bulgarian material; and Mr. David French for
          the neolithic material from Can Hasan.
      RALPH RILEY

      Evidence from phylogenetic relationships of the types
      of bread wheat first cultivated


      The interpretation of phylogeny from interchanges

The comparison of chromosome structure in different plant genotypes
provides a means of assessing relative phylogenetic positions, and in the
wheat group interchange differences are most useful for this purpose. In the
origin of an interchange, segments are exchanged reciprocally between
chromosomes that are usually completely unrelated in their genetic functions.
Thus two chromosomes, with the linearly arranged order of segments
ABCDEF and UVWXYZ, might undergo an exchange to give rise to
chromosomes with the new structures ABCXYZ and UVWDEF. Chromo¬
somes with structures altered in this way may become fixed in populations
derived from the individuals in which they first occurred. In some instances it
is possible to recognize experimentally which is primitive and which derived.
  Differences between individual plants or plant populations, due to inter¬
changes, can be recognized from the behaviour of chromosomes at meiosis
in hybrids between them. Where the parents differ by the presence of an
interchange, instead of all the chromosomes associating in pairs, or bivalents,
four chromosomes associate together in a quadrivalent. These four chromo¬
somes will be the two from one parent with the original structure and the two
from the alternate parent with the interchanged structure. In this way inter¬
change differences can be readily recognized and used to trace phylogenies
and work of this kind has been carried out in wheat1.
  The method can be explained by discussing the relationships of the four
wheat varieties, Chinese Spring, V220, Holdfast, and Cappelle-Desprez.
From meiosis in hybrids the following relationships were established:


  Chinese Spring X V220—no quadrivalent — no interchange difference,
  Chinese Spring x Holdfast—one quadrivalent = one interchange differ¬
    ence,
  Chinese   Spring x Cappelle-Desprez—two        quadrivalents = two     inter¬
    change differences,
174    Dart H Domestication and exploitation of plants   RILEY


  Holdfast X Cappelle-Desprez—one         quadrivalent = one     interchange
      difference.
  The relationships established from meiosis in the hybrids can be illustrated
diagramatically, using one or two lines to represent one or two interchange
differences respectively, as follows:
                                   Holdfast




                          /
                    Chinese Spring=Cappelle-Desprez
                        V220

  Clearly the chromosome structures of Chinese Spring and V220 are more
like that of Holdfast than like that of Cappelle-Desprez. Although there is no
internal evidence as to which is primitive and which derived, it is apparent
that a chromosome structure like that of Holdfast must have been intermedi¬
ate to whichever of the other two states is derived.



        The archetypic chromosome structure of wheat

Triticum aestivum, the most widely cultivated wheat, has 42 chromosomes
that were derived in evolution from the 28-chromosome emmer wheat,
T. turgidum, and from the 14-chromosome, weed grass Aegilops squarrosa.
The complete sets of chromosomes of both these species are present in T.
aestivum, but, because many forms of wheat differ from each other due to the
presence of interchanges, their original ancestral structure may have been
modified.
  Obviously interest attaches to the recognition of forms of T. aestivum with
the primitive chromosome structure. This requires the establishment of
42-chromosome forms in which there are no interchanges relative to
emmer in the chromosomes derived from emmer, and in which among the
remaining chromosomes there are similarly no interchanges relative to the
chromosomes of Ae. squarrosa. From the study of meiosis in hybrids, T.
aestivum ssp. vulgare variety Chinese Spring was shown to have no inter¬
change differentiation relative to either T. turgidum ssp. dicoccoides or Ae.
squarrosa. Consequently the ancestral chromosome structure of the 42-
chromosome wheats is present in Chinese Spring.



        Forms of T. aestivum

 There are a number of subspecies of T. aestivum, the 42-chromosome wheat,
 that are separated on the basis of major morphological distinctions, although
                     Evidence of the types of bread wheat first cultivated   175

the differences between them are generally simply inherited2. These sub¬
species are:

  T. aestivum ssp. vulgare          bread wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. comp actum       club wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. spelta           large spelt or dinkel wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. sphaerococcum    Indian dwarf wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. macha
  T. aestivum ssp. vavilovi

   Faced with this range of variation an interesting question concerns the form
that was first available for agricultural use, since presumably all diverged
from a single prototype at the 42-chromosome level. Any subspecies which
does not possess the primitive chromosome structure can presumably be
dismissed from this role, so that it is important to ascertain how widely the
primitive structure is distributed.



      The distribution of the primitive chromosome structure

The primitive chromosome structure of T. aestivum ssp. vulgare Chinese
Spring was used as a standard against which the structures of other forms
were compared in hybrids. The results were as follows:

Number of interchange
 differences from the
  primitive structure       Subspecies                  Comments
        None              vulgare          one form from Kashmir (in 1930)
                          spelta           two forms from Baktiari region of
                                           Iran (in the 1950’s)
         One              vulgare          seven forms, European, Chinese,
                                           Indian, and American
                          spelta           two European, and three Baktiari
                                           forms
                          compactum
                          vavilovi
         Two              vulgare          one French form
                          macha
                          sphaerococcum

  So far as this limited exploration goes, only subspecies vulgare and spelta
have the primitive chromosome structure and there is thus no evidence that
any of the other subspecies could have been available to the first cultivators.
Of course a wider survey might reveal that some of the other subspecies have
similar ranges of structural variation to those that have been observed in
vulgare and spelta. Arguments supporting some other subspecies as the most
176   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    RILEY


primitive would, however, certainly be aided by the demonstration in it of
forms with the primitive structure, since the present evidence favours vulgare
or spelta.
  The only forms of spelta with the primitive structure were collected in the
Baktiarian area of Iran by Professor H. Kuckuck3. Other forms of spelta from
the same area differed from the primitive structure by a single interchange, as
did the two central European forms studied. If the same interchange proves
to be present in the European and Baktiarian forms, then it must have existed
formerly in a continuous population, or in a common pool, that is now relict
in these widely disjunct areas. If the interchanges were all the same it would
demonstrate the antiquity of spelta, showing that the European and Iranian
forms did not arise independently from vulgare.
  The two forms of vulgare with the primitive structure both came from the
more easterly range of the subspecies. Chinese Spring probably came from
the Chungking region of China, while the other variety, V220, was obtained
from Kashmir. Kashmir is within the area in which 42-chromosome wheat
could have been first formed—this area being delimited by the distribution of
Ae. squarrosa. However the present results can be taken as no more than a
hint that the primitive chromosome structure in vulgare may have been
better preserved in the eastern part of its present area of distribution.
  Work on chromosome structures has so far shown that either vulgare or
spelta may have been the first 42-chromosome form. This approach is not
capable of discriminating between them, but a study of the geographical
distribution of the primitive structure, in both forms, might well provide
information that would assist the choice.



      Notes

      1 Riley, R., Coucoli, H. and Chapman, V. (1967). Chromosomal inter¬
        changes and the phylogeny of wheat, Heredity, 22, pp. 233-48.
      2 Mackey, J. (1954). The taxonomy of hexaploid wheat, Svensk. hot.
        Tidskr., 48, pp. 579-90.
      3 Kuckuck, H. (1959). On the findings of Triticum spelta L. in Iran and on
        the arising of Triticum aestivum-types through crossing of different
        spelta-types. Wheat Inf. Serv., 9-10, pp. 1-2.
        WILLIAM C. STURTEVANT

        History and ethnography of some
        West Indian starches

The traditional classificatory rubrics of western science and everyday dis¬
course are becoming less suitable as we learn more about the range of alterna¬
tive possibilities in the relations between man and the living world around
him. Concepts such as “domestication”, “cultigen”, “ornamental”, “agricul¬
ture”, “horticulture”, or “irrigation” refer to bundles of cultural, biological,
and historical variables which can now be seen to occur in various combina¬
tions in different places and different periods, combinations which are
inadequately classified by these and many similar terms. It is probably time to
abandon the broader rubrics in order to concentrate on defining and analysing
more specific variables, examining their changing associations in different
instances and their functional and historical interrelations with features from
other spheres such as sociological, economic, ecological, and biological
ones.
  Classificatory criteria such as whether a species can survive without
human care, whether a species has been genetically modified through man’s
activities, or the extent to which his biotic environment has been intentionally
or unintentionally changed by man, are cultural as well as biological. The
cultural variables are of several major sorts, including for plants, (i) ethno-
scientific features, i.e. those related to folk botanical concepts, including folk
taxonomies; (2) techniques of protection, selection, planting, cultivation,
collection, and harvesting; (3) techniques of processing, after collection or
harvesting; (4) storage and preservation methods; (5) utilization or con¬
sumption techniques. In addition there are of course relevant or correlative
features of general technology, economics, settlement patterns, social organiz¬
ation, religion and mythology, and so forth.
  While I think the time has come for ethnographers, archaeologists,
geographers, and historians to make an intensive effort to sort out and
specify the cultural variables involved in the care, modification, and use
of plants and plant products by human societies everywhere, I am not
prepared myself to search the vast quantity of pertinent literature. Rather, I
want to examine here one narrow example: the shifting associations of
178   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant


processing and utilization techniques with three species in one relatively
restricted culture-area over a period of about 450 years1.
  The region involved is the West Indies, especially the Greater Antilles—
the islands of Puerto Rico, Jamaica, Hispaniola (present-day Haiti and the
Dominican Republic), and Cuba—with some attention to some of the Lesser
Antilles (Dominica, Barbados, St. Vincent, the Virgin Islands, and the
Grenadines). When the Spanish arrived here in the 1490s, the Greater
Antilles, except for a few corners, were densely populated by groups of
Arawakan-speaking Indians largely sharing the same culture; for convenience
I refer to these as “Taino”, without distinguishing the closely similar “Sub-
Taino”. This label is unambiguous, even though it may be etymologically
inappropriate as Sauer has recently objected2—his suggested replacement,
“(Island) Arawak”, is inappropriate because of possible confusion with the
culturally quite distinct Arawak of the South American mainland. The
Lesser Antilles were occupied by a different cultural group for whom the
label “Island-Carib” has become standardized (the men’s form of speech
here contained many Carib loan words, yet the language, like Taino, belonged
to the Arawak rather than the Carib family).
  Although many islands in the Lesser Antilles were depopulated early in the
colonial period, social and cultural continuity with the aborigines has been
maintained through two surviving Island-Carib groups, one on Dominica
and the other, displaced, in British Honduras. The Taino population of the
Greater Antilles was almost entirely destroyed within thirty years of
Columbus’s first discovery, and the few remnants were rapidly assimilated,
genetically, socially, and culturally, into the newly-forming creole societies of
European and African origin which replaced the Indians. Despite what was a
biological and cultural disaster, there is a surprising continuity of Indian
cultural traits. This is most evident in the names and uses for domesticated
and wild plants, where even modern ethnographic data often help us to
interpret and fill out the description of aboriginal culture which can be
reconstructed from documentary and archaeological sources. Of course, many
new plants and new techniques were introduced in the subsequent centuries;
but this has been a long period of documented history through which many
of the changes can be traced in detail.
  The dense and highly developed neolithic-level aboriginal Taino popula¬
tion was primarily supported by intensive agriculture, probably of the
swidden type3. The crops belonged to that tropical South American complex
which emphasized vegetative reproduction and the use of roots (in the
ordinary rather than the technical botanical sense of this last word)4. The most
important were Manihot esculenta (manioc) and Ipomoea batatas (sweet-
potato). Other “root” crops were Xanthosoma sagittifolium (yautia, an
aroid), Calathea allouia (liren, of the arrowroot family), and probably a
species of Canna. Maize was present but of secondary importance, as were the
other seed crops normally found with it in the aboriginal New World: one
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      179

or more beans (probably Phaseolus lunatus and P. vulgaris) and a squash or
pumpkin (perhaps Cucurbita moschata). Other domesticated food plants
included Capsicum sp(p). (red pepper), Arachis hypogaea (peanut), and, in
Jamaica but not Hispaniola, Ananas comosus (pineapple). Many other plants
were used for food or other purposes, and several of these were domesticated.
However, there is often doubt as to species identification and degree of
domestication. In recent centuries many important domesticates originating in
tropical Africa and South-east Asia have been introduced, among them
bananas, yams, taro, sugar cane, millet, ackee, mango, and breadfruit. Many
utilization techniques have also changed, partly through influences from
European, West African, and non-Antillean American Indian cultures.



      Manioc

Manioc is today an important food crop in most parts of the tropical world.
All other species of its genus are wild plants of the American tropics. Manihot
esculenta Crantz is usually supposed to have first been domesticated in north¬
eastern South America; the principal botanical specialist on the plant now
thinks that Mexico-Guatemala is at least as likely to have been the centre of
origin. The starch-rich tubers of this plant contain varying amounts of a
toxic cyanogenetic glycoside. Those varieties which have litde, or where it is
concentrated in the rind which is removed in peeling, are called “sweet”;
varieties with higher amounts more evenly distributed are called “bitter” and
require special processing techniques to remove or render the poison harmless.
Formerly, the sweet varieties were distinguished as M. aipi, M. dulcis, or
M. palmata, and the bitter ones as M. utilissima. It is now known that the
toxicity is not associated with morphological features of the plant, and that it
often varies with soil and climatic conditions and the age of the plant. All
varieties are now considered to belong to one species, M. esculenta5.
  The methods which the Taino were using to prepare food from bitter
manioc when Europeans first arrived in the sixteenth century can be specified
with some certainty, using descriptions by contemporary Spanish observers6,
comparative data on modern South American Indian ethnography, a little
archaeological evidence, and survivals into modem times of artifacts and
terminology among the non-Indian successor populations of the West
Indies.
  The Taino raised manioc in large hills constructed in swidden fields. An
important characteristic of the plant is that, like many wild crops but unlike
most cultigens, storage techniques are relatively unimportant because it can
be harvested over a very long period. Thus the tubers were taken out of the
ground with a digging stick as they were needed, anywhere from ten months
to three years after the cuttings had first been planted7. These tubers were
then peeled with mussel or scallop shells, and pulped by grating. A grater
i8o   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant


made from a stone covered with shark skin yielded a finer flour for a better
quality bread, called “jaujau”; in nineteenth-century Cuba a board sheathed
in shark skin was still used as a grater, and the finest bread was known there
into the present century as “casabe de levisa”, “shark cassava”8. Pulp for the
ordinary bread, “casabi”, was more coarsely grated. Here there are some
difficulties in determining the nature of the graters. Judging from com¬
parative evidence9 one would expect a grater made from a board with inset
stone chips (or, less likely, with inset or carved wooden points, or inset fish
bones, thorns, or teeth), and there are indeed archaeological examples of two-
handled hardwood graters with inset stone chips from Hispaniola and Cuba,
and the type survived into modern times in Cuba, Puerto Rico, and
Dominica10. In addition, monolithic basalt graters with one face roughened by
pecking are relatively common in Hispaniola archaeology (although they do
not occur in Cuba); this type seems unnecessarily difficult to construct, but it
is partially paralleled by graters of rough granite slabs documented for
South America11. But neither of these types is unequivocally described in
sixteenth-century written sources on the Taino. The only detailed early
description (of a type other than the one covered with shark skin) is difficult
to understand: Las Casas tells us that the Indians grate manioc roots “on
some rough stones on a kind of frame, which they call guariqueten, the
penultima short, which they make of poles and canes placed as a base for some
palm leaves or coverings, which are like deer skins; finally, in this way they
grate it in a trough so that the mass does not fall”12. Does “rough stones”
refer to a monolithic or stone-chip grater (as the archaeological and comparative
ethnographic evidence would imply), used in a trough made of, or set on, a
basketry and palm leaf mat ? Or is this a grater made of stone chips set in a
basketry framework, perhaps tied or stuffed with palm fibre (a more logical
interpretation, but a type otherwise entirely unknown), and used in a
(presumably wooden) trough? With Las Casas’ “guariqueten” should
be compared with the modern Puerto Rican Spanish term “guariquitin”,
meaning “a plaited cane bed used by the poor”; the same word occurs in the
Dominican Republic, as “guarequeten” or “guariquiten”, but here defined
as a large wooden vessel for grated manioc pulp—by an author who also cites
the pertinent passage in Las Casas, making one wonder whether his definition
applies to modern usage or is an interpretation of Las Casas’ ambiguous
description13.
   In any case, the grated pulp was next left overnight in a trough covered
with palm leaves. The next day it was stuffed into cylindrical basketry
presses, loosely plaited of palm leaves or tree bark, seven to nine feet long and
the diameter of a man’s arm or thigh, with a “handle” on each end. This
artifact, here called “sibucan”, is clearly the same as the diagonally-twilled
basketry manioc press with a loop on each end, usually called “tipiti” in the
literature on South America where it is still widespread14. One end of this
press was suspended from a tree branch, and weight applied to the other end
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches     181

—either several stones hung from it, or two or three women seated on the
outer end of a pole some twelve feet long run through the lower loop of the
press with the inner end inserted in a hole low in the trunk of the tree from
which the press was hung. As the press stretched, the juice, called “hyen”,
was expressed through the interstices of the basketry. Untreated, this juice
was poisonous, and there are records of its use by Cuban and Hispaniola
Indians in committing suicide. Boiled to eliminate the poison, the juice was
used as a sauce for flavouring other dishes. The modern Dominica Island-
Carib settle out starch from the milky fresh expressed juice, and either
return this to the meal or use it to make fine cassava cakes; the Taino may
also have done this, for there is a sixteenth-century mention of “anaiboa” as
manioc “flour” from which a fine porridge, ‘‘like blanc-mange”, was made
with milk, while in modern Cuban Spanish “naiboa” is the term for the
white, starch-bearing expressed manioc juices, and a related term, “anaiboa”,
“naiboa”, or “neiboa” today means “sticky” in the Dominican Republic15.
   The damp pulp from which the poison had been removed by pressing,
was sifted through the “hibls”, a basketry sieve made from thin strips of cane,
in order to break up the larger lumps and remove fibres and ungrated bits.
The sifted pulp or flour was placed on a hot “buren”, a large circular flat
pottery griddle an inch or so thick, attached with clay or mud to three or four
stones supporting it over a fire. The damp meal coagulated with the heat and
the cakes thus formed were turned over with thin wooden paddles after
cooking for about fifteen minutes on one side, to cook on the other. For
ordinary casabi, the meal was spread over the buren to a depth of an inch and
a half, leaving an inch or two space around the rim; the finished cake was
about a third of an inch thick. The jaujau type was spread much thinner.
When removed from the griddle the cakes were flexible, but they became
very hard after drying in the sun for several hours to a day or two, and would
then last two or three years if kept dry. Before eating the cake was broken up
with the fingers and the bits softened by dipping in a pot of liquid.
   The Spanish in the Antilles rapidly adopted cassava as a staple food and
substitute for wheat bread, and before 1550 they had introduced screw presses
to Hispaniola as more efficient substitutes for the basketry sibucan16. From
very early in the colonial period Jamaica was especially important as a centre
of production and export of cassava17. In the seventeenth century many of the
French colonists in the Lesser Antilles also preferred cassava to European
wheat bread. Here the roots were pulped on graters of pierced copper a foot
and a half long and eight or ten inches broad, attached to a board, with the
lower end resting in a vessel. An improved tool was also in use: a large wheel
with the grater on the circumference, crank-turned by two Negro slaves while
a third applied the roots (an almost identical rotary grater was also replacing
the manual grater in Brazil by 1648, among those who could afford it)18. The
pulp was pressed in two ways: placed in cloth sacks squeezed beneath a pole
with one end inserted in a hole in a tree (a stump is illustrated) and stone
182   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   sturtevant


weights placed on the opposite forked end, which took seven or eight hours,
or else, more commonly, the juice was expressed in an hour by placing the
pulp in a wooden “canot” some four feet long, one and a half feet wide, and
three feet deep, with holes in the sides and a fitted board lid on which were
placed stones pressed down by a similar forked branch. The pressed flour
was passed through an Indian-made basketry sieve called “hebechet” (the
term, “hebichet”, and the artifact survive among the Dominica Island-
Carib)19. A round cast-iron plate about a half inch thick (among the Indians,
a pottery griddle) was heated over a fire. On this the sifted meal was spread
about an inch thick, which was turned to cook on the other side after it had
formed a cake, then removed and sun dried (PI. iv a)20. A similar process was
used in the 1730s and 1740s to produce “le pain des Negres & des Sauvages”
in Haiti: the roots were pulped on a copper grater, pressed for twenty-four
hours to remove the poisonous juice, and cooked as flat thin cakes on an iron
plate21.
   There are also good eighteenth-century descriptions of Jamaican tech¬
niques. Here the roots were washed, scraped, pulped on an iron grater in a
tub or trough, then pressed in hair, linen, or palmetto bags placed on flat
stones and squeezed with a plank inserted in a notch in a tree trunk with
weights on the other end. The “farine” or “farina” was then dried in the sun,
pounded in a large wooden mortar, and baked over a fire on “a flat, broad
round iron, commonly called a baking-stone”, “bestrewed with the sifted
meal to whatever size or thickness people pleased to have the cakes made: this
agglutinates as it heats, grows gradually harder, and when thoroughly baked,
is a wholesome well-tasted bread” which was eaten buttered while hot or
used in puddings. A similar process was evidently used in Barbados. The
expressed juice was boiled, the viscous scum skimmed off, and the remainder
diluted with water and drunk or used as a sauce. The scrapings from the
fresh roots of bitter manioc were applied for the treatment of ulcers. The
poisonous juice as it fermented became infested with “worms” called
“topuea”; these the Indians and Negroes dried and powdered and stealthily
transferred, as a supposedly deadly poison, from beneath the poisoner’s
thumb-nail to a victim’s food bowl22.
   In the modern West Indies, manioc roots are processed in two ways. One
of these is a direct descendant of the Indian and Colonial method; essentially
the same techniques are described for Cuba, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, and the
French islands23. The roots are washed and peeled, then pulped by rubbing
them against a rapidly revolving circular grater. The pulp is placed in bags
or baskets and pressed to remove the juice—in Jamaica, at least, with the
simple lever press of a plank with one end inserted in a notched tree trunk
and the other end weighted with rocks, resting on the basket of pulp on a pile
of stones. The meal is sifted to remove fibres and ungrated bits, then cooked
on flat metal plates over a fire, constantly stirred to yield cassava meal or
formed in flat cakes which bake into cassava bread. One type of tapioca is
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      183

obtained by settling the starch out of the expressed juice, decanting the fluid
and heating the starch on flat pans until the individual grains burst and then
coagulate into tapioca pellets. Boiling the juice into a syrupy consistency
destroys its poison, and it is then used as a peppery sauce known as “cassa-
reep”.
  The second process yields starch for industrial purposes or for two forms
of tapioca; the same technique is used also in Brazil, Malaya, and elsewhere.
It involves machinery of varying complexity, but the process is basically the
same everywhere: “it is a wet milling process, water being used to convey the
starch throughout the system and to wash away impurities. Briefly, it in¬
volves washing the roots to remove foreign matter, destroying their cellular
structure so as to liberate the starch, screening off the fibrous material,
separating the starch from the water-soluble impurities and protein by
gravitational means [decanting the fluid], and drying”24. The result is known
as cassava starch or tapioca flour. Flake tapioca is produced by heating the
damp starch on metal plates until the starch grains swell and coagulate into
irregular flakes; to make pearl tapioca, the damp starch is shaken on a cloth
frame to form it into pellets, then toasted on metal plates25.
  A very simple variant process is used in the Jamaican countryside, where
the pulp from scraped and grated roots is mixed with water, “strained through
a towel held by two persons”, the milky liquid collected beneath and settled
for an hour or two, and the water poured off leaving the starch which is
either dried briefly, salted, and baked into “pot bammie”, or dried several
days, broken up in a mortar, sifted, mixed with flour, and cooked into “dump¬
lings”26.
  Manioc is an extremely important food crop in Africa, where it was
evidently introduced from Brazil in the latter sixteenth century. But the
American utilization techniques did not travel with the plant: the grater is
rare and the tipitl absent; manioc starch and tapioca are usually unknown
and cassareep is nowhere prepared27.
  On the other hand, the method for removing starch from grated manioc
pulp by washing it and settling out the starch grains is not recorded from
the Greater Antilles during the contact period or immediately after, and was
undoubtedly introduced there by the Spanish. It is an ancient European
method for getting starch from wheat28, and this may well be the source. It
might also be a European introduction of an Amazonian Indian process, for
Brazilian Indians in the seventeenth century got “vipeba” or “farinha fresca”
by settling from water in which manioc roots had soaked for four or five days29.
Historical investigations of early South American Indian techniques are
required, and the Antillean data warn us not to project modern ethnographic
information back into the past without using the historical sources which are
available.
184   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant




      Arrowroot

True arrowroot, Maranta arundinacea, is an herbaceous perennial with
rhizomes rich in starch. These are however covered with scales containing an
acrid or bitter substance which must be carefully peeled off before use, and
the cellular structure of the rhizomes is so tough that more thorough grinding
or maceration to release the starch grains is required than is the case with
manioc30.
   All species in the genus are American, and M. arundinacea itself occurs
wild in Brazil, northern South America, and perhaps Central America. It is
now widespread in cultivation throughout the tropics of both hemispheres31.
However, although many tribes of the South American tropical forest have
cultivated it in recent times as a food plant32, the history of its domestication
has not yet been investigated and we cannot be sure that it was cultivated
anywhere by pre-Columbian Indians.
   The species is frequently listed in modem sources as one of the plants
cultivated by the aboriginal Taino. This is an error; correcting the record by
an examination of how the mistake became established, and stating the
evidence against the supposition, provides a simple example of the necessity
for returning to original sources for the history of domestication.
   The best way to identify the plants which the sixteenth-century Spanish
sources mentioned as used by the Taino, is to compare the morphological
characterizations of the early writers with modern botanists’ descriptions, and
to compare the early Taino names with modem Antillean Spanish popular
plant terminology and its referents. The latter is nearly always the crucial
point, for the early authors’ plant descriptions are usually inadequate, while
the Taino names they give for useful plants, wild or cultivated, were mostly
adopted by the Spanish invaders.
   The early accounts describe two West Indian plants which modern
authors have erroneously identified as arrowroot. One of these is the “liren”
or “lleren”, said to be a cultivated plant with a starchy root which was eaten
raw or cooked33. This was definitely Calathea allouia, for the description of the
plant fits this species well enough and the same uses and the same or similar
names are attested for it in the modern Antilles: “lleren, leren, liren, lairen”,
or “leiren”, in Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic34. Botanists
agree with this equation, but the anthropologists Loven and Friederici were
misled by the older synonym Maranta allouya into thinking that the plant was
M. arundinacea, and this misidentification was followed by Roumain and
Rouse. The same error was made by Sapper, who even added “hier heimisch”.
Sauer pointed out that the early descriptions of liren “clearly” do not refer
to M. arundinacea “but may refer to Calathea allouia”, yet he left the question
open and has recently included arrowroot in a list of aboriginal Antillean
domesticates under the name “araru” (see below on this term)35.
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches   185

   The other plant sometimes identified as arrowroot is one which Peter
Martyr called “cabaioes” and merely described as “like onions”; Oviedo
wrote the same Taino name as “cauallos”, which he says resemble the liren
but are somewhat larger, “grow in poor and thin soils. . . . [and are] whole¬
some food and enjoyed by the Indians. It is a wild fruit and it comes up and
grows through the care of nature alone”36. The last point would seem to
eliminate M. arundinacea, which does not occur wild in the Greater Antilles
except as an escape from cultivation37. Probably this was a species of Canna;
Xanthosoma violaceum has also been suggested, but this seems less probable if
Oviedo’s “like liren” means the whole plant, rather than just its edible
underground portion38.
   These are evidently the only contact-period descriptions which might
refer to arrowroot. Furthermore, it is surely significant that nowhere today
does a Taino name for it survive. The common names in use are all (with one
barely possible exception) of clearly post-Columbian application. In Spanish¬
speaking areas the plant is usually known as “yuquilla” (“little manioc”) or
“sagu” (“sago”, a term of Malayo-Polynesian origin); other names are
“raiz americana” (“American root”), “maranta”, “salop” or “salep” or
“sulup”, and “touola” or “tulola”39—only the last is of unknown origin, and
it does not occur in the sixteenth-century literature. The French name
“herbe aux fleches” is apparently a loan-translation from a now-lost Island-
Carib name. The most common term is the English “arrowroot” and its
derivatives, Spanish “arrurruz”, Portuguese “araruta”, Dutch “arraroot” or
“arrowroot” or “pijlwortel”, German “Pfeilwurz”, and a great variety of
terms used in South-east Asian languages whose shapes are so close to the
English word that this must be their ultimate source40. Martius suggested
that the English term is derived by folk etymology from mainland Arawak
“aru-aru”, “starch of starch” (“aru” or “haru” being the name for both
manioc and moriche palm starch)41; but as we shall see, the signification of
the English name is clear enough so that its resemblance to Arawak must be
coincidental. Bartlett, on the other hand, tentatively suggested that the
English name derives from “araru” or a similar form in an Indonesian
language42, although the American origin of the plant plus the etymology of
the English name means that the direction of borrowing was just the reverse
of what Bartlett suggests.
   The earliest recognizable description of the plant in the West Indies was
published by du Tertre in 1654. According to him, soon after a French
governor had made peace with them in 1641 the Island-Caribs, evidently
largely from Dominica, brought to him in Guadeloupe “une plante qu’ils
appelloient en leur langue, l’herbe aux fleches (ie n’ay pu retenir le mot
Sauvage)”. The leaves and flowers of this plant as described by du Tertre
agree well with modern botanists’ characterizations of Maranta arundinacea.
Unfortunately he does not say whether the Indians cultivated the plant. But
he does specify that “the savages value this plant highly, and not without
186   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   sturtevant


considerable reason; because we discovered by everyday experience the rare
and admirable qualities which it possesses: its root pounded and applied to
wounds of arrows poisoned with manchineel [Hippomane manchinella\,
entirely allays the venom and even stops incipient gangrene, relieves all kinds
of inflammation, as also the swelling caused by stings of the wasps of
Guadeloupe, which is rather dangerous”43. A similar source is indicated by
Sir Hans Sloane, who in 1696 described “Indian arrow root” under the Latin
phrase Canna Indica radice alba alexipharmaca, adding that he had seen the
plant in 1687-8 in gardens in Jamaica and other Caribbean islands and had
heard that it grew wild in Dominica; he also cited a description by Gomara,
first published in 1552-3, which merely says that the Caribs of Santa Marta
in Colombia used “the juice of the root” of an undescribed plant as an anti¬
dote for poisoned arrow wounds, for blindness, and for curing the evil-eye.
In 1707 Sloane described the plant at greater length—a description recognized
by modern botanists as referring to Maranta arundinacea—summarized du
Tertre’s account of its properties, and added:

  This plant was first brought from the Island Dominica, by Colonel James
  Walker, to Barbados, and there planted. From hence it was sent to Jamaica,
  being very much esteem’d for its Alexipharmack qualities. That Gentleman
  observed the Native Indians used the Root of this Plant with success,
  against the Poison of their Arrows, by only mashing and applying it to the
  poison’d wounds.44

  According to Barham, a Jamaica physician writing before 1711, the plant
Sloane labelled Canna Indica was called “arrow root” because it was first
known as an Indian antidote for poisoned arrow wounds, for which the juice
was taken internally and the bruised root was used as a poultice on the wound.
“This was discovered by an Indian, taken after he had wounded an European
with one of these poisoned arrows, whom they tortured until he promised to
cure him, which he did effectually with the root of this plant.” Barham cited
two cures by applications of the bruised root, of bites by a poisonous black
spider, one on the finger and another a woman bitten “at the necessary-
house, upon the buttock”, and a case of accidental poisoning in which two or
three men died but one was saved by drinking two glasses of juice from
bruised arrowroot root. He also considered arrowroot an efficacious remedy
for several other ills:

  I have seen this root frequently given in malignant fevers with great
  success, when all other things have failed. When I make up lapis con-
  trayerva for my own practice, I always put in a good quantity of it. I have
  given it decocted, but it is best in powder, which causes sweat; the dose is
  from a drachm to two. ... It hath no manner of ill taste or smell; it works
  by sweat and urine, and yet it is a great cordial; it provokes the terms, and
  clears lying-in women; it drives out the small-pox or measles; and if it was
                   History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      187

  candied as eringo-root, it would make a pleasant preserve, for it possesses
  the like prolific virtues.45

   Before 1750 arrowroot was also used medicinally in Barbados—“the juice
of this [root] is exceeding cold, and, being mixed with Water, and drunk, is
looked upon to be a Preservative against any Poison of an hot Nature”—but
also “out of this Root is made likewise the finest starch, far excelling any made
with Wheat” and this latter is the earliest mention of a non-medicinal use. By
 1774 in Jamaica, although still used chiefly as a medicine, the roots were also
“washed, dried, and reduced to an impalpable powder” which “makes an
excellent starch; and has been used as a succedaneum for the common sort”,
and the plant is one of a list of “wholesome and palatable viands”. The first
description of the method of converting the roots into starch was published
in 1787. Relying on his own observations in Jamaica, William Wright des¬
 cribed Maranta arundinacea as a plant of the “gardens and provision
grounds”, the year-old roots of which were dug, washed, “and then beaten in
large deep wooden mortars to a pulp” which was thoroughly stirred in water
in a large tub. The fibrous parts were removed and discarded, and the milky
water strained through “a hair sieve, or coarse cloth”. The starch was settled
out, the supernatant water drained off, and the starch remaining rewashed
and settled again, then “finally dried on sheets in the sun”. Wright does not
mention the uses of this starch, although “a decoction of the fresh roots makes
an excellent ptisan in acute diseases”. Somewhat later, arrowroot starch was
described as used in Jamaica as “a warm alexipharmic”, to “resist the force
of poisons”, and “administered in infusions to the sick”, but also “it has been
sometimes known to be used for food when other provisions were scarce”46.
   Although specimens of arrowroot seeds were first sent to England (from
Mexico) before 1732, the first large shipment of starch, presumably from
Barbados or Jamaica, is dated 1799. Shortly thereafter, the starch in milk was
recommended as an infant food, having “lately been introduced into
England”. Its use here is illustrated by the fact that a writer in 1846 cited
Barham and Wright in order to suggest that a plant known in England as a
source of edible starch might also be useful as an antidote for poisons. In the
same year a French pharmacologist noted that what the English called
“Indian arrow-root” had been imported from Jamaica for a dozen years or so,
that he had determined this starch to be exactly the same as that of “Maranta
arundinacea cultivated in the other Antilles”, and the plant had also been
transported to India where it was grown for commercial starch. In fact, it may
have been grown for starch in Bengal as early as 1813 (although there are Old
World plants, such as Tacca pinnatifida, which have also been called “arrow
root”)47.
   In 1823 a Danish pharmacist in St. Croix, Virgin Islands, reported that
arrowroot was there grown for its starch which had long been generally used
as a household and hospital remedy “against catarrhal illness, diarrhoea,
188   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   STURTEVANT


dysentery, and in every other illness where mucilaginous remedies are
employed” (use as an antidote not being mentioned), and that it was con¬
sidered a household necessity as a sick food (mixed with Madeira or Port,
sugar, and cinnamon or nutmeg), for starching clothes, and as a substitute,
presumably in puddings, for sago, tapioca, and “Persian salep”. In St. Croix
the starch was prepared by washing the roots after the scaly rind was removed,
pulping them in a grating mill or by pounding in a stone mortar, mixing the
pulp with water and pouring this through a sieve into a second vessel, re¬
peatedly washing and sieving the mass remaining in die sieve, and settling the
starch out of the mixture which passed through the sieve. After the super¬
natant water was poured off the settled starch, the latter was mixed with
fresh water and again settled out, and this process of washing and setding
was repeated until the supernatant water remained clean. The starch was
finally spread out to dry in the sun. The resulting product, if properly washed
and unadulterated, was preferred to manioc starch. “The [arrowroot] salop
which is prepared on the Danish and English islands is generally unadulter¬
ated; that which comes from Puerto Rico, on the other hand, is uncleanly
prepared and mixed with cassava and other kinds of starch, reportedly from
bananas and plantains, potatoes, and other starch-bearing plants.” During
the 1830s there is another, briefer, report of arrowroot starch used in sick
diets and for starching clothes in the Virgin Islands, a statement that the
plant was grown in large quantities in a few localities in Cuba, and a report
that small amounts were raised by Negroes in Antigua48. Thus before 1840
the plant was grown in English, Danish, French, and Spanish areas of the
Antilles, and the starch was exported to Europe at least from English and
French islands.
   In the middle of the last century the chief exporters of arrowroot starch
were Bermuda and St. Vincent. In Bermuda the roots were grated against
a hand-operated wheel, the circumference of which was sheathed with a
grating surface of punctured “tinned iron”. The pulp was washed in a
mechanically turned cylindrical sieve, the starch setded out, rewashed and
sifted several times, and the caked starch broken up and dried in the sun.
Although a few years before 1845 all mills in Bermuda were hand-operated, in
that year a large establishment used horse-driven machinery, and about
400,000 lb. of starch per year were produced on the island. In the same year
the methods used in St. Vincent were well described. Here the roots were
peeled by hand, ground to a pulp in a mill consisting of two pairs of brass
rollers, and the starch washed from the pulp in large copper cylinders with
sieve bottoms containing rotating paddles driven by a water wheel. The
starchy water was strained, settled, washed and resettled several times, and
the starch sediment finally sun dried and packed. This latter method was in
use in Bermuda by the 1880s. In St. Vincent the initial peeling was aban¬
doned, and a rotating cylinder set with saw blades replaced the brass rollers49.
   Arrowroot has been cultivated for its starch, sometimes for export, in many
                   History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      189

places in recent years: especially in various West Indian islands and in
Bermuda, but also in Brazil, the Guianas, Mexico, West Africa, Natal,
Madagascar, Mauritius, Reunion, India, Ceylon, mainland South-east Asia,
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Guam50. Apparently only in South-east Asia
are the whole rhizomes used as food, prepared by boiling or roasting51
(probably harvested young so as not to be too woody, although the starch
content is also lower then).
   However, large scale cultivation of the plant survives only in St. Vincent in
the Lesser Antilles, which has exported some five to ten million pounds of
starch yearly over at least the last thirty years, over two-thirds of each year’s
export going to the United States, under one-third to the United Kingdom,
and the remainder mostly to other West Indian islands. In the most modern
starch factory in St. Vincent, the roots are first washed, then cut into bits
which are rasped and crushed to a pulp which is mixed with water and passed
in a continuous flow on to vibrating sieves; the residue on the sieves is re¬
crushed and re-sieved twice; the “starch milk” which passes through the
sieves is pumped into a centrifuge separator, the starch from this is washed,
sieved through fine wire cloth, and re-centrifuged, and the resulting starch is
mixed in water with sulphurous acid (which retards fermentation) and then
settled in tanks from which the supernatant water is later drained, the top
layer of the sediment hosed away to remove the remaining fibres, and the
starch finally dried in a mechanical steam drier. The starch is exported as an
ingredient (sometimes a minor one) for arrowroot biscuits, and for use in
puddings and dietetic foods; some arrowroot starch is used as a face powder
base and in glues52.
   Earlier uses have survived in West Indian folk medicine: the roots are
pounded for poultices for wounds and ulcers in Dominica, and washed,
grated, and boiled to make a gruel for treating diarrhoea in Jamaica; in the
Grenadines arrowroot is even still used as an antidote for manchineel poison¬
ing, not of course from poisoned arrows, but a suspension of the starch taken
internally when the fruit has been eaten and starch poultices applied to
external burns from manchineel juice53.
   The historical development in the West Indies seems clear: an Indian
antidote for poisoned arrow wounds, adopted by non-Indians as an antidote
for other poisons then extended to other medicinal uses, then used as a food
for the sick at about the same time as it became a source of starch for other
purposes with starch gaining techniques very likelv transferred from those
used with manioc.



      Zamia

Zamia, the most widespread and variable of the New World cycad genera,
consists of twenty to thirty poorly understood species ranging from peninsular
190   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   sturtevant


Florida through the Greater Antilles, southern Mexico, Central America, and
northern South America as far as the Mato Grosso of Brazil. The plants have a
crown of pinnate evergreen leaves ranging up to a metre or more in length
which spring from a short cylindrical or tuberous stem. This starch-rich stem
sometimes weighs several pounds, and is subterranean in all the eight or so
closely similar Antillean species. Evidently the stems, leaves, and seeds of all
species are poisonous—probably a toxic glycoside is involved; the variety of
production techniques shows that either fermentation or washing of the
pulped stems eliminates or reduces the toxicity sufficiently to allow human
consumption54.
   The fundamental source for the identification of Zamia as a plant used by
the Taino is Las Casas’ sixteenth-century account of Hispaniola. His descrip¬
tion of “guayaga” is a good characterization of the Zamia plant: “the roots
are like fat squills; the shoots and leaves which come from them out of the
ground, about two or three spans [long], somewhat resemble the dwarf fan-
palms of Andalusia, although they are narrower and smoother and more
delicate than those of the dwarf fan-palm”. The identification is clinched by
the name (reported also by an earlier source, as “guaiega” described as
“round roots . . . like truffles, and larger”), which survives as a name for
Zamia in the modern Dominican Republic in the form “guayiga” or
“guayiga”. Another name, “guayaro” and variants, is given by Las Casas and
others for a wild “root” eaten by the Indians of Hispaniola; this may also
have been Zamia, since one early source describes its preparation as strikingly
like that used for guayaga, and since variants of “guayaro” survive today in
Cuba as names for Zamia. However, in modern Puerto Rico the latter name is
applied to a wild yam, Rajania cordata, and both Las Casas and Peter Martyr
seem to distinguish the two names as referring to different plants in early
 Hispaniola55.
    According to Las Casas, the guayaga was an important food resource of the
Taino of the Higuey region of Hispaniola. They collected the stems from wild
 plants, grated them “on some rocks rough like rasps” (presumably monolithic
 or stone-chip graters), and shaped the pulp into balls which were put in the
 sun for one to three days until they began to rot and became blackish and
 wormy. The balls were then flattened into small cakes which were baked on a
 clay griddle supported with stones over a fire (evidently the buren used for
 cooking cassava)—“and if it is eaten before it becomes black and is not full of
 or with some or many worms, the eaters will die”.
    The historical connections between the Indian preparation of Zamia in
 Hispaniola and the modern methods there and elsewhere in the Antilles are
 most readily traced through eighteenth-century descriptions of Puerto Rican
 methods. 1 wo processes were used along the south coast of that island, where
 Zamia was a food of the poor and in times of famine: the stems were grated,
 the pulp allowed to rot in water, then dried and sifted, and formed into small
 leaf-wrapped loaves roasted on hot coals, which were black when eaten or;
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      191

else the grated pulp was piled to rot, breed worms, and dry out into a dark red
mass which was then ground to a powder and shaped into small loaves56. A
similar process is reported for the mid-nineteenth century: the pulp from
grating was heaped up and covered with banana leaves for three or four days
while it fermented and worms grew in the interior; the mass was then broken
open and the worms gradually “disappeared” as it dried into a coarse, dark
flour, which was ground up and used to make small loaves. But by this time
Zamia was also used here for starch production with techniques probably
transferred from those used to gain manioc starch: the stems were washed and
grated, the pulp stirred in water and the liquid strained through a cloth or
sieve, the starch settled out and rewashed two or three times before being sun
dried. The starch was used only for starching clothes. The pulp and juice
from grating and the wash-water from starch production were all used to
treat sores, ulcers, and buboes57. Today wild Zamia still yields a scarcity food
in parts of Puerto Rico, where the peeled stems are grated on a tin grater, the
pulp being caught in a bowl of salted water and then squeezed dry in a rag,
salt added, and formed into small leaf-wrapped loaves which are baked in
ashes58. The rotting stage which provided the main link with Indian methods
has been dropped, although the use of the pulp for small leaf-wrapped loaves
eaten in times of food scarcity has persisted at least since the eighteenth
century.
   For the Dominican Republic we have only nineteenth- and twentieth-
century reports of the use of Zamia. Soldiers of the French army besieged in
the city of Santo Domingo in 1808 presumably heard that bread could be
made from the plant, for they attempted to transfer the techniques they knew
for making cassava, but with fatal results because squeezing the juice out of
Zamia pulp will not remove the poison. We have two good accounts of the
preparation of starch from wild Zamia here, a brief one dated 1872 and a very
full one from 1952-4. The stems are washed, peeled (now, but not in the
nineteenth century), and grated on a piece of sheet metal roughened with
nail holes and loosely attached to a wooden paddle. The pulp is then washed
three times in a burlap sieve suspended from four posts, the starch-bearing
water settled for twenty-four hours and decanted leaving the starch which is
rewashed and strained through broadcloth, and finally settled again. The
starch is dried for several days suspended in cloth wrappings which are
occasionally twisted and squeezed. The remaining hard ball is broken apart
and spread out during a final sun drying. The starch is mainly sold in the
cities for starching clothes (in the nineteenth century it was also exported to
Curasao and St. Thomas for the same purpose). But some of it is eaten,
combined with various ingredients in several recipes, although leaf-wrapped
loaves are not reported from this island. Here there is no survival of the
aboriginal Hispaniola processing techniques, but simply continuity in the
food use of the same wild plant59.
   Zamia starch was sold in Jamaica markets in the early nineteenth century.
192   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant


some of it evidently imported from the nearby Cayman Islands60. It is still
used for food in the Caymans, a clear porridge being made from starch
extracted by grating on perforated tin graters, washing the pulp, and settling
the starch from the wash water61. In western Jamaica Zamia grows wild, but it
is also cultivated to some extent in household gardens—the only report from
the Antilles of cultivation of the genus for food or starch. Two other starch-
yielding plants, tous-les-mois (Canna sp.) and arrowroot, are also grown here,
and the starch gaining process is the same for all three: the stems are peeled,
washed, and grated on a metal grater perforated with nail holes; water is
added to the pulp which is then squeezed in a cloth, and the starch-bearing
water collected in a bowl where the starch settles out. The water is then
poured off, and salt and lime juice added to the starch to bleach it before it is
dried in the sun. It is eaten as a gruel, cooked with water, milk, and sugar62.
   For Cuba we have only brief statements in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries that starch was extracted from Zamia stems by grating, washing,
settling, and drying, and was used for starching clothes, for industrial pur¬
poses, and to make a sweetmeat. In eastern Cuba, the starch (?) of Zamia is
also used in medicinal baths63. There are only brief references, beginning in
1838, for the use of Zamia starch as food and for starching clothes in the
Bahamas64.



      Conclusion

We have examined first a true cultigen of aboriginal times, taken over by the
European and African settlers of the West Indies; second, a plant only
doubtfully aboriginally domesticated and that not in the Greater Antilles but
introduced there from the Lesser Antilles by Europeans; and third, a wild
plant of the region used by both Indians and their successors. All three have
starch-rich “roots” which are not used for food after simple cooking, but
rather require special preparation techniques either because they are toxic or
because they are tough and woody, or both.
   The aboriginal preparation techniques for bitter manioc and Zamia were
quite different, although they shared two artifacts, the grater and the buren.
Both are toxic; with manioc, the poison was removed by squeezing out the
juice, whereas with Zamia it was removed by fermentation. The Europeans
introduced a new technique for gaining starch, by washing the pulp and
settling the starch out of the wash-water. This technique was apparently first
applied to manioc, from which it was transferred to Zamia. In the latter case
the new method also was an effective substitute for fermentation as the means
for eliminating the toxicity of the root. Thus the preparation techniques for
both plants changed, yet remained at least as similar to each other; in recent
folk usage they still share a similar grater, and now also the washing and
settling technique, but the buren has been dropped from Zamia preparation
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches        193

methods. The Europeans also introduced a new plant, arrowroot, at first not
for its starch but for medicinal purposes adopted with the plant from the
Indians of the Lesser Antilles. Once adopted the use changed, starch for food
and other purposes being gained from the roots by techniques transferred
from those used with manioc. One result was that the new plant was in¬
corporated into the peasant agricultural repertoire to such an extent that
modern anthropologists have erroneously assumed that it, like the manioc its
uses now resemble, is a survival of a Taino domesticated food plant.
   This case-history demonstrates—what is not in doubt, but is often over¬
looked—that there need not be a constant association between plants, the
artifacts used in their preparation, and the uses made of the products. The
use of the buren or griddle in the preparation of a product from a wild plant
is perhaps relevant to the interpretation of archaeological pottery griddles as
evidence on the history of manioc domestication. The change from a medicinal
to a food use of one of these plants reminds us that any ethnobotanical field
study shows a remarkable number of non-food uses of plants, for medicine,
for the manufacture of artifacts, and for a wide variety of other purposes (e.g.
personal adornment and perfume; weights and measures; punk and tinder;
fish poisoning; various symbolic, magical, and religious associations). Any of
these uses may be the basis for domestication or selection, even though
ultimately a plant may be used mainly or entirely as a source of food.
   The West Indies, as the first site of modern European colonial expansion,
may be unusual in the extent of historical documentation available. But in
much of Africa, Asia, and Oceania, as well as the New World, there are also
historical records covering several centuries. Too often, modern ethnographic
data are used to interpret the archaeological evidence in regions where
historical documents would help to peel off the major recent changes due
directly or indirectly to this European expansion.



      Notes
      1 This paper is part of a long-term study of the historical economic botany
        of the Antilles and Florida; in particular, the section on Zamia is a
        summary of the Antillean chapter of a monograph to deal with the
        utilization history of this genus throughout its range. The author is
        especially indebted to S. W. Mintz, the late J. M. Goggin, and J. W.
        Thieret, for bibliographic and other suggestions.
      2 Saucer, C. O. (1966). The Early Spanish Main. Berkeley and Los Angeles,
        pp. 37, 185-6.
      3 Sturtevant, W. C. (1961). Taino agriculture in J. Wilbert (ed.) The
        evolution of horticultural systems in native South America, Antropoldgica
        Supplement Public, 2, Caracas: Soc. de Ciencias Naturales La Salle,
        pp. 69-82; Sauer, C. O. (1966), op. cit., pp. 51-2, doubts it, but I still
        think that the scanty evidence points towards shifting rather than
        permanent fields.
      4 For a valuable discussion of the contrast between the vegetative and seed
        complexes of New World agriculture, including hypotheses on the origins.
194   Port II Domestication and exploitation of plants      sturtevant

         spread, and correlates of the vegetative type, see Sauer, C. O. (1959)- Age
         and area of American cultivated plants, Adas del XXXIII Congreso
         Internacional de Americanistas, I, pp. 215-29, San Jose.
       5 Rogers, D. J. (1965). Some botanical and ethnological considerations of
         Manihot esculenta, Econ. Bot., 19 (4), pp. 369-77; Johnson, R. M. and
         Raymond, W. D. (1965). The chemical composition of some tropical
         food plants IV. Manioc, Tropical Science, 7 (3), pp. 109-15; Chadha,
         Y. R. (1961). Sources of starch in Commonwealth territories III: Cassava,
         Tropical Science, 3 (3), pp. 101-13.
       6 Especially Las Casas, B. de. (1909). Apologetica historia de las Indias.
         Historiadores de Indias, 1. Nueva Biblioteca de Autores Espaholes 13,
         pp. 29-31 (chapter 11); Oviedo y Valdes, G.F.de(i85i). (1520-57) Historia
         Generaly Natural de las Indias, 1, Madrid: Real Academia de la Historia,
         pp. 269-71 (book 7, chapter 2); Cobo, B. (1890). (1653) Historia del
         Nuevo Mundo, 1. Sevilla, pp. 351-4 (book 4, chapter 7).
       7 Sturtevant, W. C. (1961). ibid.
       8 Pichardo, E. (1862). Diccionario Provincial Casi-Razonado de Vozes
         Cubanas. 3rd ed., Habana. p. 130; Suarez, C. (1921). Vocabulario
         Cubano ... Habana. p. 121.
       9 e.g., Nordenskiold, E. (1919). An ethno-geographical analysis of the
         material culture of two Indian tribes in the Gran Chaco, Comparative
         Ethnographical Studies, 19, Goteborg, p. 79 and map 11; Roth, W. E.
         (1924). An introductory study of the arts, crafts, and customs of the
         Guiana Indians, Bur. of Amer. Ethnol. Annual Rep., 38, pp. 277-80;
         Bennett, W. C. (1949). Household furniture, in Steward, J. H. (ed.)
         Handbook of South American Indians, 5, p. 26.
      10 The archaeological examples: Fewkes, J. W. (1907). The aborigines of
         Porto Rico and neighboring islands, Bur. of Amer. Ethnol. Annual
         Rep., 25, p. 194; Harrington, M. R. (1921). Cuba before Colombus,
         Indian Notes and Monographs [Miscellaneous 17], New York. p. 98
         and pi. 6; Herrera Fritot, R. (1947). Tres tipos de objetos indoarqueo-
         logicos de Santo Domingo, Revista de Arqueologta y Etnologia, epoca 2,
         ano 2, nums. 4-5, pp. 125-42, Habana, pp. 127, 137. The modern
         survivals: Pichardo, E. (1862). ibid.; Bachiller y Morales, A. [(1883).
         Cuba Primitiva; origen, lenguas, tradiciones e historia de los indios de
         las Antilles May ores y las Lucayas. 2nd ed., Habana. p. 372; La Torre y
         Huerta, C. de. (1890). Conferencia cientifica. Anales de la Real Academia
         de Ciencias Medicas, Fisicas y Naturales de la Habana, Revista Cientifica,
         27, p. 328; Coll y Toste, C. (1907). Prehistoria de Puerto-Rico. San Juan,
         p. 250; Taylor, D. (1938). The Caribs of Dominica, Anthropological
         Papers, 3, Bur. Amer. Ethnol. Bull., 119, p. 137.
      11 Nordenskiold, E. (1919). op. cit. pp. 82-4.
      12 Las Casas, B. de. (1909). ibid.
      13 Malaret, A. (1917). Diccionario de provincialismos de Puerto Rico. San
         Juan. p. 82; Malaret. (1946). Diccionario de Americanismos, 3rd ed.,
         Buenos Aires, p. 454; Tejera, E. (1951). Palabras Indijenas de la Isla de
         Santo Domingo (con adiciones por Emilio Tejera, prologo de Pedro
         Henriquez Urena). Ciudad Trujillo, p. 242.
      14 See, for example, the description and a distribution map in Metraux, A.
         (1928). La Civilisation Materielle des Tribus Tupi-Guarani. Paris, pp.103-4,
         114-15. A recent study of the modern South American distribution of
         this and other methods for squeezing manioc pulp is Dole, G. E. (i960).
         Techniques of preparing manioc flour as a key to culture history in tropical
         America, in Wallace, A. F. C. (ed.) Men and Cultures. Philadelphia,
         pp. 241-8.
      *5 Taylor, D. (1938). op. cit. p. 138; Echagoian. (1864). Relacion de la Isla
         Espanola enviada al rey D. Felipe II, por el licenciado Echagoian, oidor de
              History and ethnography of some West Indian starches            195

   la Audiencia de Santo Domingo, Col. de Documentos Ineditos Relativos al
   Descubrimiento, Conquista y Colonizacion de las Posesiones Espaholas en
   America y Oceania, 1, Madrid, p. 17; Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 375;
   Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. p. 188; Tejera, E. (1951). op. cit. p. 391.
16 Las Casas, Oviedo y Valdes and Cobo (see note 6) all comment on the
   substitution; Las Casas mentions the screw press.
17 Cundall, F., and Pietersz, J. L. (1919). Jamaica under the Spaniards:
   abstracted from the archives of Seville. Kingston, pp. 2, 4, 5, 10, 15, 19, 35,
   etc.
18 Piso, W. (1648). De medicina brasiliensi, in Ioannes de Laet (ed.)
   Historia Naturalis Brasiliae . . . Leiden, p. 53.
19 Taylor, D. (1938). op. cit. pp. 128-9. The term has spread from the Lesser
   Antilles to Haiti, for Mintz, S. W., tells me (in lit., June, 1968) that
   “bicet” is the Haitian Creole term for “tray”, including a winnowing tray.
20 Tertre, J. B. du (1654). Histoire Generate, des Isles des Christophe, de la
   Guadeloupe, de la Martinique, et Autres dans PAmerique. . . . Paris, pp.
   178-184; Tertre. (1667). Histoire Generate des Antilles Habites par les
   Franpois . . ., II, Paris, pp. 112-18 and plate facing p. 419.
21 Desportes, J. B. R. P. (1770). Traite ou Abrege des Plantes Usuelles de S.
   Domingue. Vol. 3 of his Histoire des maladies de S. Domingue. Paris, p. 223.
22 Long, E. (1774). The History of Jamaica . . . , III, London, pp. 772-8;
   Browne, P. (1789). The Civil and Natural History of Jamaica, London,
   pp. 349-50; Wright, W. (1787). An account of the medicinal plants
   growing in Jamaica, London Medical Journal, 8 (3), pp. 262-3; Barham, H.
   (1794). Hortus Americanus: containing an account of the . . . vegetable
   productions of South-America and the West-India Islands, and particularly
   of the island of Jamaica . . . Kingston, pp. 34-5; Hughes, G. (1750). The
   Natural History of Barbados. London, p. 150.
23 Cunliffe, R. S. (1916). Yuca; su cultivo, variedades, contenido en almidon
   y fabrication, Rep. de Cuba, Secretaria de Agricultura, Comercio y Trabajo,
   Estacion Experimental Agronomica, Santiago de las Vegas, Boletin No. 34,
   Habana, pp. 19-20; Cook, O. F. and Collins, G. N. (1903). Economic
   plants of Porto Rico, Contributions from the U.S. National Herbarium,
   8 (2), p. 184; Nicholls, H. A. (1929). A Text-Book of Tropical Agriculture.
   2nd ed., rev. by Holland, J. H., London, pp. 430-3; Beckwith, M. W.
   (1927). Notes on Jamaican ethnobotany. Publics, of the Folk-lore Founda¬
   tion, 8, Poughkeepsie: Vassar College, pp. 42-3; Pairault, A. (1900).
   Plantes comestibles feculentes cultivees aux Antilles, Bull, de TAssoc, des
   Chimistes de Sucrerie et de Distillerie de France et des Colonies, 17 (1-2),
   p. 80.
24 Wurzburg, O. B. (1952). Root starches other than those of white and
   sweet potato, Econ. Bot., 6 (3), pp. 211-15.
25 Cunliffe, R. S. (1916). op. cit. pp. 20-8; Nicholls (1929). op. cit. p. 433;
   Burkill, I. H. (1904). The tapioca plant: its history, cultivation and uses;
   a review of existing information, Agricultural Ledger, 11 (10), pp. 135-8;
   Everington, E. (1912). Cassava starch and its uses, West Indian Bulletin,
    The Journal of the Imperial Dept, of Agric. for the West Indies, 12 (4),
   pp. 527-9; Schery, R. W. (1947). Manioc—a tropical staff of life. Econ.
   Bot., 1 (1), pp. 20-5.
26 Beckwith, M. W. (1927). op. cit. p. 42.
27 Jones, W. O. (1959). Manioc in Africa. Stanford, pp. 32, 102.
28 Brautlecht, C. A. (1953). Starch: its sources, production and uses. New
   York. p. 2.
29 Piso, W. (1648). op. cit. pp. 53-4.
30 Bailey, L. H. (ed.) (1912). Cyclopedia of American agriculture. II Crops.
   New York. p. 199; Wurzburg, O. B. (1952). op. cit. p. 152.
31 Schumann, K. (1902). Marantaceae. 11. Heft (IV. 48), in A. Engler (ed.)
196   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants        sturtevant

         DasPflanzenreich...Leipzig, pp. 125-6; de Candolle, A. (1883). Originedes
         Plantes Cultivdes. Paris, pp. 64-5; Bernegg, A. S. von (1929)- Tropische und
         Subtropische Weltwirtschaftspflanzen; ihre Geschichte, Kultur und volks-
         wirtschaftliche Bedeutung. I. Teil: Starke- und Zuckerpflanzen, Stuttgart,
         p. 273; Bois, D. (1927). Les Plantes Alimentaires chez tousles Peuples et
         a travers les Ages; histoire utilisation, culture. 1. Paris, p. 459.
      32 Lowrie, R. H. (1948). The tropical forests: an introduction, in Steward,
         J. H. (ed.) Handbook of [South American Indians, 3, p. 1; Nimuendaju,
         C. (1948). The Cawahib, Parintintin, and their neighbors, in Steward,
         J. H. (ed.) op. cit. p. 295.
      33 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1851). op. cit. pp. 279-80 (book 7, chapter 6);
         Las Casas, B. de (1909). op. cit. p. 29 (chapter 10); Cobo, B. (1890).
         op. cit. p. 357 (book 4, chapter 9); Santa Cruz, Alonso de (1918). Islario
         General de Todas las Islas del Mundo. Madrid, p. 458.
      34 Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). Botany of Porto Rico and the
         Virgin Islands, Scientific Survey of Porto Rico and the Virgin Islands,
         5, New York. p. 178; Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. pp. 161-2; Maza,
         M. G. de la (1889). Diccionario Botanico de los Nombres Vulgares Cubanosy
         puerto-riquehos. Habana. p. no; Malaret, A. (1931). Diccionario de
         Americanismos. 2nd ed., San Juan. pp. 317, 325, 514; Abad, J. R. (1888).
         La Republica Dominicana; reseha general geografico-estadistica. Santo-
         Domingo. pp. 69, 333.
      35 Colmeiro, M. (1892). Primeras noticias acerca de la vegetacion americana
         . . . , Ateneo de Madrid, Conferencias, Madrid, p. 29; Barrett, O. W. (1928).
         The Tropical Crops . . . New York. p. 381; Loven, S. (1935). Origins of the
         Tainan Culture, West Indies. Goteborg. p. 369; Friederici, G. (1947).
         Amerikanistisches Worterbuch, Univ. Hamburg, Abhandlungen aus dem
         Gebiet der Auslandskunde, 53. Reihe B., Volkerkunde, Kultur geschichte und
         Sprachen, 29, pp. 346-7; Roumain, J. (1942). Contribution a l’etude de
         l’ethnobotanique precolombienne des Grandes Antilles, Bull, du Bureau
         d’ethnologie de la Rep. d’Haiti, 1, p. 40; Rouse, I. (1948). The Arawak, in
         Steward, J. H. (ed.). Handbook of South American Indians, 4, p. 523;
         Sapper, K. (1934). Geographic der altindianischen Landwirtschaft.
         Petermanns Mitteilungen, 80, pp. 41-4, 80-2, 118-21; Sauer, C. O. (1950).
         Cultivated plants of South and Central America, in Steward, J. H. (ed.),
         Handbook of South American Indians, 6, p. 511; Sauer, C. O. [(1966).
         op. cit. p. 54.
      36 Anghiera, P. M. d’ [Peter Martyr] (1574). De Rebus Oceanicis et Novo Orbe,
         decades tres . . . Cologne, p. 301 (decade 3, book 9); Oviedo y Valdes,
         G. F. de (1851). op. cit. pp. 284-5 (book 7, chapter 15).
      37 Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). op. cit. p. 177; Schumann, K.
          (1902). op. cit. p. 126.
      38 The suggested identification as arrowroot is in Colmeiro, M. (1892). op.
         cit. p. 37, and in Barrett, O. W. (1928). op. cit. p. 380—both for “cauallos”;
          on p. 30 of the same work, Barrett suggests Canna for “cabaioes”; Xantho-
          soma is suggested by Gordon, B. Le Roy (1957). Human geography and
         ecology in the Sinu country of Colombia, Ibero-Americana, 39, pp. 101-2.
      39 “Yuquilla” in Cuba: Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. pp. 231-2; Maza y
          Jimenez, M. G. de la, and Roig y Mesa, J. T. (1914). Flora de Cuba
          (datos para su estudio), Rep. de Cuba, Sec. de Agric., Comercio y Trabajo,
          Estacion Experimental Agronomica, Santiago de las Vegas, Boletin No. 22,
          Habana, p. 27; Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 466; “yuquilla” in Puerto
          Rico: Cook, O. F. and Collins, G. N. (1903). op. cit. p. 266;Malaret, A.
          (1917). op. cit. p. 150; Otero, J. I., and Toro, R. A. (1931). Catalogo de
          los nombres vulgares y cientificos de algunas plantas puertorriquenas.
          Gob. de P.R., Depto. de Agric. y Trab., Estacion Experimental Insular,
          Rio Piedras P.R., Boletin No. 37, San Juan, p. 29; “sagu” in Cuba:
             History and ethnography of some West Indian starches          197

   Pichardo, E. (1862). ibid.; Maza, M. G. de la and Roig, J. T. (1914). ibid.;
   Suarez, C. (1921). ibid.; La Sagra, R. de (1831). Historia Econdmico-
   Politicay Estadistica de la Isla de Cuba . . . Habana. p. 82; Roig y Mesa,
   J. T. (1928). Diccionario botanica de nombres vulgares cubanos. Rep. de
   Cuba, Sec. de Agric., Comercio y Trabajo, Estacion Experimental Agro¬
   nomica, Santiago de las Vegas, Boletin Num. 54, Habana, pp. 628, 725:
   “sagu” in the Dominican Republic: Abad, J. R. (1888). op. cit. pp. 69,
   334; “raiz americana” in Cuba: Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 442;
   “maranta” in Puerto Rico: Grosourdy, R. de (1864). El medico Botanico
   Criollo. 4. Paris, p. 371; Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). op. cit.
   p. 177; Otero, J. and Toro, R. A. (1931). ibid.; “maranta” in Haiti:
   Barker, H. D. and Dardeau, W. S. (1930). Flore d'Haiti; cle et description
   des or dr es-families et genres des Spermatophytes d'Haiti . . . Porte-au-
   Prince. p. 60—but these are instances of a “common” name invented
   rather than collected by botanists, for the Linnaean genus was named in
   honour of Bartolommeo Maranta, a sixteenth-century Venetian botanist
   and physician (Miller, P. and Martyn, T. (1807). The Gardener's and
   Botanist's Dictionary . . . new ed. London s.v. Maranta; Bailey, L. H.
   (1949). Manual of Cultivated Plants . . . rev. ed. New York. p. 292;
   “West-Indian salep”: Bernegg, A. S. von (1929). ibid.; “salop” in the
   Virgin Islands: Benzon, P. E. (1823). Om den vestindiske Salop, dens
   Dyrkning, Tilberedelse og almindelige Egenskaber, Tidsskrift for
   Naturvidenskaberne, 2, pp. 158-72; Schomburgk, R. H. (1833). Berichte
   iiber die Kulturpflanzen Westindiens, Linnaea, 8, p. 264; “sulup” in
   Puerto Rico: Grosourdy, R. de (1864). op. cit. 3, p. 141—these are
   variants of a term, evidently ultimately derived from Arabic, which is
   applied in India and the Near East to dried orchid tubers and starch made
   from them (Watt, G. (1908)). The Commercial Products of India, London,
   pp. 962-3; Yule, H. and Burnell, A. C. (1903). Hobson-Jobson: a glossary
   of colloquial Anglo-Indian words and phrases... new ed. London, [reprinted
   1968, London], p. 784; Brautlecht, C. A. (1953). op. cit. p. 285); “touala”
   in Jamaica: Cook, O. F. and Collins, G. N. (1903). op. cit. p. 185; “tulola”
   is cited for Cuba by both Maza, M. G. de la (1889). op. cit. p. 102, and
   Roig, J. T. (1928). op. cit. p. 669, although the same two authors writing
   jointly (1914, op. cit. p. 17) give this word with the note, “we doubt the
   name”.
40 Dutch “arraroot” is given by Boldingh, I. (1914). The Flora of the Dutch
    West Indian islands, II, Curasao, Aruba and Bonaire, Leiden, p. 19; many of
   the South-east Asian and Malaysian terms are listed in Heyne, K. (1927).
   De Nuttige Planten van Nederlandsch Indie. 2nd ed. Batavia, pp. 507-8,
   and in Brown, W. H. (no date) [between 1935 and 1941]. Useful plants of
   the Philippines. Commonwealth of the Philippines, Dept, of Agric. and
   Commerce, Manila, Technical Bull., 10 (1), p. 483; to these may be added
   Burmese adalu’.
41 Martius, C. F. P. von (1867). Zur Ethnographic Amerika’s zumal
   Brasiliens, Vol. 1 of his Beitrage zur Ethnographic und Sprachenkunde
   Amerika’s zumal Brasiliens. Leipzig, p. 689 note; for “haru” and “aru”,
   see Roth, W. E. (1924). op. cit. p. 216.
42 Bartlett, H. H. (1953). English names of some East-Indian plants and
   plant products, Asa Gray Bull., 2 (2), pp. 159-62.
43 Tertre, J. P. du (1654). op. cit. pp. 151-2.
44 Sloane, H. (1696). Catalogus Plantarum quae in Insula Jamaica sponte
   proveniunt . . . adjectis aliis quibusdam quae in insulis Maderae, Barbados,
   Nieves, & Sancti Christophori nascuntur .... London, p. 122; G6mara,
   F. L. de (1749). Historia de las lndias. Historiadores primitivos de las
   Indias Occidentales (Andres Gonzalez de Barcia. ed.), 2, Madrid, pp.
   63-5 (chapter 71); Sloane (1707). A Voyage to the Islands Madera, Barbados
198    Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants       sturtevant


          Nieves, S. Christophers and Jamaica . . . 1, London, pp. 253-4; among
          modern botanists recognizing this description are Schumann, K. (1902).
          op. cit. p. 135, and de Candolle, A. (1883). op. cit. p. 65.
      45 Barham, H. (1794). op. cit. pp. 6-8.
      46 Hughes, G. (1750). op. cit. p. 221; Long, E. (1774). op. cit. pp. 759,
          855; Wright, W. (1787). op. cit. pp. 269-70; Browne, P. (1789). op. cit.
         pp.1x2-13.
      47 Miller, P. and Martyn, T. (1807). op. cit., s.v. Maranta; Anonymous
          (1893). Arrowroot, Bull, of Misc. Info., Royal Gardens, Kew, 82, 83,
         pp. 331-3; Hamilton, W. (1846). On the Maranta arundinacea, and its
          applications as an antidote to animal and vegetable poisons, Pharmaceutical
         Journal and Transactions, 6 (1), pp. 25-8; Guibourt, [G.] (1846). Nouvelles
         considerations sur l’amidon, l’arrow-root et le sagou . . ., Journal de
         Pharmacie et de Chimie, troisieme serie, 9, pp. 191-8; Milburn, W.
         (1813). Oriental Commerce ... 2. London, p. 207.
      48 St. Croix: Benzon, P. E. (1923). ibid.; later Virgin Islands: Schomburgk,
          R. H. (1833). op. cit. pp. 264-5; Cuba: La Sagra, R. de (1831). ibid.;
         Antigua in 1837: Harris, D. R. (1965). Plants, animals, and man in the
          Outer Leeward Islands, West Indies . . , JJniv. of Calif. Publ. in Geog¬
         raphy, 18, p. 113.
      49 Cogswell, C. (1845). On the arrow-root of Bermuda. London and Edinburgh
         Monthly Journal of Medical Science, 5 (10), pp. 789-96; Ure, A. (1845).
         Recent Improvements in Arts, Manufactures, and Mines: being the second
         edition of a supplement to the third edition of his Dictionary. London, pp.
          8-10; Saunders, W. (1882). Report of the Superintendent of Gardens and
          Grounds, Report of the [(/.S'.] Commissioner of Agriculture for the Years
         1881 and 1882, p. 226; Anonymous (1893). St. Vincent arrowroot. Bull,
         of Misc. Info., Royal Gardens, Kew, 80, pp. 191-204.
      50 Bernegg, A. S. von (1929). op. cit. p. 275; Bois, D. (1927). ibid.; Burkill,
         1. H. (1935). A Dictionary of the Economic Products of the Malay Peninsula.
         London, p. 1424; Raymond, W. D. and Squires, J. (1959). Sources of
         starch in colonial territories II: Arrowroot (Maranta arundinacea Linn.),
          Tropical Science, 1 (3), pp. 182-92; Safford, W. E. (1905). The useful
         plants of Guam . . . Contributions from the U.S. Natl. Herbarium, 9,
         pp. 318-19.
      51 Indonesia: Heyne, K. (1927). ibid.; Malaya: Burkill, I. H. (1935). ibid.;
         Philippines: Brown, W. H. n.d., op. cit. p. 438; Burma: author’s field
         notes, 1955.
      52 Raymond, W. D. and Squires, J. (1959). ibid.
      53 Nicholls, H. A. (1929). op. cit. p. 434; Beckwith, M. A. (1927). op. cit.
         p. 11; Howard, R. A. (1952). The vegetation of the Grenadines, Wind¬
         ward Islands, British West Indies, Contributions from the Gray Herbarium
         of Harvard Univ., 174, p. 98.
      54 Schuster, J. (1932). Cycadaceae. Heft 99 (IV. I), in Engler, A. (ed.) Das
         Pfanzenreich .... Leipzig, pp. 150-60; Whiting, M. G. (1963). Toxicity
         of cyads, Econ. Bot., 17 (4), pp. 270-302.
      55 The sixteenth-century accounts are: Las Casas, B. de (1909). op. cit.
         pp. 11, 29 (chapters 3, 10); Las Casas, B. de (1951). Historia de las Indias.
         Mexico and Buenos Aires. 1, pp. 419, 462 (book 1, chapters 106, 121),
         2, p. 265 (book 2, chapter 17); Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1851). op. cit.
         p. 284 (book 7, chapter 16); Anghiera, P. M. d’ [Peter Martyr] (1574).
         ibid.; and Ansanus, T. et al. (1867), Carta que escribieron varios Padres de
         la orden de Santo Domingo, residentes en la isla Espanola..., Coleccion de
         Documentos Ineditos ... [del Archivo] de Indias. pp. 419, 430; the modern
         popular terminology is in: Boyrie Moya, E. De, Krestenson, M. K. and
         Goggin, J. M. (1957). Zamid starch in Santo Domingo . . , Florida
         Anthropologist, 10 (3-4), pp. 17-40; Barker, H. D. and Dardeau, W. S
                 History and ethnography of some West Indian starches          199

       (1930). op. cit. p. 3; Abad, J. R. (1888). op. cit. p. 73; Garda, J. G.
       (1876). Memorias para la historia de Quisqueya 6 sea de la antigua parte
       espahola de Santo Domingo .... Santo Domingo, p. 250; Roig, J. T.
       (1928). op. dt. p. 348; Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). op. tit. pp.
        164-5; Grosourdy, R. de (1864). op. tit. 3. p. 137; and Maza, M. G.
       de la (1889). op. tit. p. 78.
    56 Miyares Gonzalez, F. (1954). Noticias particulares de la Isla y Plaza de
        San Juan Bautista de Puerto Rico. Rio Piedras. pp. 79-80; Abbad y
       Lasierra, I. (1866). Historia Geografica, Civil y Natural de la Isla de San
       Juan Bautista de Puerto-Rico. new ed. San Juan. pp. 252, 438.
    57 Grosourdy, R. de (1864). op. tit. 3, pp. 144-5.
    58 Mintz, S. W., in lit. 9/9/1957, reporting his field inquiries.
    59 Prenleloup, L.-A. (1872). Remarques sur quelques Zamia et leurs produits,
       Bull, de la Soc. Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles, 11 (67), pp. 277-82,
        Lausanne; Boyrie Moya, E. de et al. (1957). ibid.
    60 Pereira, J. (1854). The Elements of Materia Medica and Therapeutics, 2. 3rd
       Amer. ed. Philadelphia, pp. 283-4; Smith, J. (1882). A Dictionary of
       Popular Names of the Plants which furnish the Natural and Acquired Wants
       of Man . . . London, p. 362.
    61 Lewis, C. B. (Inst, of Jamaica, Kingston), in lit. 3/7/1954 to J. M. Goggin.
    62 Davenport, W. H., in lit. 20/8/1955, reporting his field inquiries.
    63 Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. p. 272; Maza, M. G. de la, and Roig, J. T.
       (1914). op. cit. p. 25; Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 529; Roig y Mesa,
       T. J. (1945). Plantas Medicinales, Aromaticas 0 Venenosas de Cuba. Habana.
       P-5H-
    64 Lindley, J. (1838). Flora Medica; a botanical account of all the more im¬
       portant plants used in medicine . . . London, p. 550; Jackson, J. R. (1864).
       Cyads. Intellectual Observer, 5 (4). p. 252; Gifford, J. (1912). The Ever¬
       glades and Other Essays relating to Southern Florida. 2nd ed. Miami, p. 171.




8—DOPAA
      M. VILLARET-von ROCHOW

      Fruit size variability of Swiss prehistoric
      Malus sylvestris

The study of prehistoric apples in Switzerland is at the moment confined to
size comparisons of carbonized fruit-halves from different neolithic and
bronze age sites with a few present-day specimens. Unfortunately wild crab
apple trees, belonging to Malus sylvestris ssp. sylvestris, have become rare in
western Switzerland; they are scattered about the Jura and the Prealps, are
even less frequent on the Swiss Central Plain (Schweizerisches Mittelland)
and occur sometimes in hedges in the Rhone Valley. In 1967, we gathered
from one tree in a Carpinion forest reservation “Bois de Chenes” near Nyon,
twenty specimens of fruit. They show a wider range of variability than the
statistics published by K. and F. Bertsch1 which were based on sixty wild
apples from Beuron/Wiirttemberg (see Fig. 1). Our specimens were cut and
carbonized in the laboratory at 220-240°C. We noticed considerable shrinkage
(about 25% in breadth and 28% in length) and, in connection with this, the
characteristic somewhat flattened shape of most of our crab apples became
even more pronounced. The maximum size of our material found in 1967
corresponds, after carbonization, astonishingly well with the limit values
given by Oswald Heer2; they lie within 27 mm. breadth and 24 mm. length.
Basing results only on dry herbarium materials, I formerly fixed the maximum
size of recent crab apples as 31 X 28 mm.3; but as it would be better to
compare prehistoric collections with carbonized present-day specimens, the
values given by Heer would seem to be much more suitable.
   Shape and size of apple pips vary greatly in M. sylvestris (sensu stricto) and
hitherto have not yielded any reliable relationship to fruit size. Since the
increase in volume of fruit is in most cases due to an increase in the breadth
of the fruit (only a small percentage of the fruit are oblong or show a tendency
to increase in length), the breadth of the fruit has been chosen as an approxi¬
mate criterion for fruit-size (Fig. 1). The percentage of oblong forms is
mentioned in the descriptions which follow.
mm   0   5   10 15   0   5   0   5   0   5   10 15 20   0   5   10 15 2 0 25   0   5 10 15 20 25   0   5   10 15   .0   5   0   5   10 15




                     White: fresh fruits.
                     Black: carbonized material.
                     All curves refer to maximum diameters.
                     Underlined numbers: arithmetic means.
                                              Swiss fruit size variability   203

  The prehistoric samples in Fig. 1 refer to the following sites:

     (A) Neolithic


1 Vallon des Vaux (Chavannes le Chene, Vaud): rock-shelter in calcareous
Molasse sandstone from which about 400 apples were collected during the
excavation by Dr. M. Sitter ding in 1966. The site is considered to be among
the oldest neolithic localities in western Switzerland (Chasseen pottery).
Age: c. 3200 b.c. The fruit material shows an exceptionally high number of
oblong specimens (28-5%) as well as very small crab apples. With reference
to the latter, we cannot follow K. and F. Bertsch’s4 suggestion that one small
specimen found in a Bandkeramik site at Bockingen represented “Malus
paradisiaca” or “Malus praecox Borkh5”.


2 Robenhausen: older museum collections of Heer’s and Messikommers’
classic “lake-dwelling” at Kanton Zurich which are now in the Musee
d’Archeologie Lausanne (109 specimens), the Landesmuseum Zurich
(eighteen specimens), and the Historisches Museum Bern (thirty-one
specimens). Seventeen specimens which were measured by Neuweiler6 have
been added to the graph in Fig. 1. Approximate age: between 3000 and
2000 b.c., Cortaillod to Schnurkeramik.

3 Egolzwil 4: excavation by the Landesmuseum Zurich in i960 (134 speci¬
mens examined). Frequency of oblong specimen 15%, some pear-shaped.
Approximate age: between 3000 and 2500 b.c.

4 Ziirich-Utoquai-Fdrberstrasse: excavated by Kantonale Denkmalspflege
Zurich in 1962. All the fruit specimens were found in the lowest Horgen
level and they are especially well preserved, with large fleshy parts. Only
one specimen is longer than it is broad (see Fig. 2). Approximate age:
between 2500-2200 b.c.

     (B) Bronze age


5 Morigen/Kanton Bern: collection of the Historisches Museum Bern
(nine specimens). Even the small specimens contained normally developed
seeds. Approximate age: between 1200-800 b.c.

6 Sumpf-Zug: excavated by Dr. J. Speck7 and collections now in the Kan-
tonales Museum fur Urgeschichte Zug (eighty-four specimens examined).
The fruit are typically-shaped crab apples, only three of which are longer
than they are broad. Even the smallest ones have been cut carefully in halves.
Age: about 1200-800 b.c. This settlement was occupied for at least 200 years
and was gradually enlarged8.
204   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   villaret-VON ROCHOW




                                                                                 to




                                                                                 04


                                                                                 o



                                                                                 $

                                                                                 to
                                                                                 <N


                                                                                 CN



                                                                                 C\i
                                                                                 CN)




         Zurich-Utoquai-Farberstrasse
                                                                                 o
                                                                                 <N


                                                                             -     s
                                                                                   E
                                                                                  -c
                                        (n-67)                               - to "O
                                                                                   0
                                                                                   0)

                                                                                       /|\




                                                         mm length (r


                                                                 <2 a <u v
                                                                             1 £
                                              Swiss fruit size variability   205


7 Corcelettes near Grandson/Vaud: museum collection of Musee d’Archeo-
logie, Lausanne (nine specimens, all of them cut).

As far as can be seen from the material examined, only a low percentage of
the total number of fruit found in any of the settlements he beyond the range
of present-day crab apples. None of the curves in Fig. 1 indicate a significant
frequency maximum outside the crab apple class. Moreover, very large
specimens appear to be restricted to only a few neolithic localities, and only
one or two specimens reach a maximum of 36 mm. breadth (Robenhausen:
one specimen at Landesmuseum Zurich; Wangen: one specimen according to
Bertsch9; and one further specimen (III, 1) from Bodman seems to be of
considerable size10). Among the oblong fruits, the “longer lake dwelling apple”
described by Heer and figured in one specimen from Robenhausen has only
been observed in one specimen from Burgaschisee-Sud11.
   Swiss settlements of the late bronze age until now have only yielded a
small Malus sylvestris-type (total numbers examined: 102). Instead of an
increase in size which could have been caused by selection and cultivation,
we observe, on the contrary, a decrease in size (see Fig. 1: arithmetic means
of breadth: 19-1; 20-5; 18-4 mm.). Whatever the interpretation of large size
neolithic apples should be, there is as yet no evidence at all of a progressive
evolution up to the late bronze age.
   Heer and Neuweiler both suggested that there was cultivation of apples in
the Swiss neolithic period, but their arguments were based on quite different
views. Heer12 laid particular stress on the high numbers, and great importance
of, wild, acid crab apples for the Swiss lake-dwelling people before suggest¬
ing that a “considerable number” of larger apples, found only at Robenhausen
by the author, probably represented a “cultivated variety”. Basing his
conclusion on his general experience and some few measurements, Neuweiler13
noticed a gradual transition between the small and the large-size fruit so that
he could not accept them as a separate variety. But further on in the same
article Neuweiler—surprisingly enough—returned to de Candolle’s old
idea14 that the large quantity of stocked prehistoric apples suggested apple
cultivation.
   Meanwhile the general picture of Swiss neolithic husbandry has repeatedly
shown its mixed character: besides cereals, flax, opium poppy and other
crops, considerable numbers of wild fruit have been collected (such as hazel
nuts (Corylus avellana), raspberries (Rubus idaeus), acorns (Quercus spp.)
and sloes (Prunus spinosa)), for instance at Auvernier near the end of the
neolithic period, where they are associated with large numbers of apple pips.
Thus, several kinds of wild fruit still played an important role during the
Swiss neolithic period and therefore the presence of large quantities of
apples cannot be taken as evidence that they also were not wild.
206   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   vjllaret-von rochow



      Notes
       1 Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). Geschichte unserer Kulturpflanzen. Stuttgart,
         pp. 1-275.
       2 Heer, O. (1865). Die Pflanzen der Pfahlbauten, Neujahrsbl. Naturf. Ges.
         Zurich a.d.J. 1866, 68, pp. 1-54.
       3 Villaret-von Rochow, M. (1967). Frucht- und Samenreste aus der
         neolithischen Station Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud, Acta Bernensia, 2 (4),
         Fig. 13.
       4 Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). ibid.
       5 Bertsch, K. (1961). Einheimische Wildapfel, Jb. vaterl. Naturkde Wurttem-
         berg, 116, pp. 185-94.
       6 Neuweiler, E. (1924). Pflanzenreste aus den Pfahlbauten des ehemaligen
         Wauwilersees, Mitt. Naturf. Ges. Luzern, 9, pp. 301-23.
       7 Speck, J. (1955). Die Ausgrabungen in der spatbronzezeitlichen Ufersied-
         lung Zug-“Sumpf”, in Das Pfahlbauproblem. Monographien zur Ur- und
         Fruhgeschichte der Schweiz, 11, Basel, pp. 275-334.
       8 Huber, B. and Merz, W. (1962). Jahrringchronologische Untersuchungen
         zur Baugeschichte der urnenfelderzeitlichen Siedlung Zug-Sumpf,
         Germania, 40, pp. 44-56.
       9 Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). op. cit. p. 97.
      10 See Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). op. cit. Fig. 49, which is classed among
         “cultivated neolithic apples”.
      11 Villaret-von Rochow, M. (1967). op. cit. pi. IV, Figs. 10 and n.
      12 Heer, O. (1865). ibid.
      13 Neuweiler, E. (1924). ibid.
      14 de Candolle, A. (1883). Uorigine des Plantes Cultivees. Paris, pp. 1-377.
      Section 2: Domestication and exploitation of animals




      R. J. BERRY

      The genetical implications of domestication in animals


When early man discovered that there were certain advantages in conserving
certain animals near to his dwelling place, he was entering into the first phase
of domesticating them1. At this juncture, the only sign of domestication
available to the archaeologist would be ecological2. However there is fre-
quendy too small an amount of material available for determining if animal
remains found in association with man represent a random sample of a wild¬
living population or one drawn from a “domesticated” population. In practice
it is necessary to ask the question: what criteria can be used to characterize a
domesticated form ?
    This question pre-supposes that domestication involves change; some
of this change will be inherited and some will be environmentally determined.
Whatever the cause, there are two questions that must be faced in any attempt to
specify characters by which domesticated forms can be recognized. These are:

1 Are there any known morphological changes which inevitably accompany
  domestication ?
2 Can the same changes arise by any other mechanism besides domestication ?

  This paper is an attempt to suggest answers to these questions. I have
used animal examples, but the same arguments can almost certainly be applied
to plants3.



      Changes which follow domestication (see Fig. 1)

A number of traits have been claimed to be characteristic of domesticated
forms. Zeuner4 has summarized the more important of these:
2o8   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    berry


1 Size: early types of domesticated animal tend to be smaller than their wild
  relations and “small size is used as a diagnostic character in prehistoric
  deposits where wild and domesticated forms are liable to occur together”.
2 Colour: wild colouration is exceptional in most domesticated animals.
  In particular “piebaldness in the animals depicted by early man is definite
  evidence of domestication”.
3 Changes in the skull: “the most important effects of domestication are
  exhibited by the skull, mainly because they are easily recognizable in
  fossil material from ancient dwelling sites. . . . The rule is that the facial
  part of the skull tends to be shortened relative to the cranial, which is but
  little affected.” This may cause correlated changes in the dentition, and “at
  a very early stage of domestication the teeth became smaller than they are
  in wild forms. . . . With progressive shortening of the face, teeth which are
  already in the state of reduction may disappear entirely, such as the first
  pre-molars and third molars”. Horn size tends to decrease.
4 Post-cranial skeleton: no changes which reliably indicate domestication
  are accepted, but “in domesticated cattle, weak muscle-ridges and poorly
  defined facets of the joints make it comparatively easy to recognize speci¬
  mens of domesticated origin, and also in the domesticated pig, where the
  epiphyses of the limb bones do not fuse with the diaphyses until long after
  maturity is reached”. The number of caudal vertebrae is almost invariably
  reduced in domesticated forms, except in sheep where an “increase in the
  number of tail vertebrae beyond twelve is a virtually certain character of
  domestication”.
5 Hair: the greatest changes are associated with the underlying shorter hairs,
  especially in species which have a large amount of wool in the wild
  forms.
6 Soft parts: the development of local fat accumulations (as in the hump of
  camels) has usually been favoured under conditions of domestication;
  the size of the brain relative to the rest of the body may be reduced, some
  parts being affected more than others; musculature may be increased (as in
  draught or racing horses) or reduced (as with the chewing muscles of
  carnivores).

7 In general

  (a) New characters are rarely produced, but existing ones selected.
  (b) Pathological conditions are often favoured.
  (c) Under domestication, growth rates are frequently affected, producing
      allometric and often neotenous changes.

  Zeuner discusses each of these points, mentioning exceptions. The crucial
question is to what extent some or all of these changes, which are undoubtedly
associated with domestication in certain forms, may be regarded as generally
diagnostic of the state.
                     The genetical implications of domestication in animals   209



      Observed changes upon domestication: the Norway rat

The most intensive studies of domestication have been carried out on the
grey or Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus)5. This work helps to put into per¬
spective the suggestions summarized above, and is important because it
involved domestication alone without associated selection for economic or
aesthetic characters.
  The Norway rat seems to have been introduced to Britain about 1730 and
to North America about 1775. It was probably taken into captivity about
18006. At that time rat-baiting was popular in England and France. Recently
trapped rats were placed in a pit and a terrier let loose amongst them. The
spectators bet on the time required by different terriers to kill the last rat.
Large numbers of rats had to be caught and held in readiness for such
spectacles. Richter7 has written of records which indicate that albinos were
removed from such collections and retained for breeding and exhibition.
  This was the beginning of the domestication of most modem strains of
laboratory rats, and no more is known of the process than for any other
animal. However, in 1919 H. D. King8 began a “repeat” of the domestication
of the species. He took into his laboratory 16 male and 20 female wild-caught
rats, and the study of their descendants is still continuing, more than fifty
generations later.
  The first results of laboratory breeding of King’s “captive-greys” were
associated with reproductive performances. The early generations were
marked by a high degree of female sterility (only 6 of the original 20
females bred) and infant mortality, and it was necessary to foster the first
generation young on to “well-domesticated” mothers. It was suggested that
the infertility of the wild females and the relatively high proportion of sterile
animals was due to disturbance of the nervous system brought about by fear
and confinement in cages. However the incidence of female sterility declined
from 37 to 6% in the first eight generations, and all the females chosen for
breeding from the thirteenth generation onward were fertile.
  As the proportion of fertile females increased, so did the length of the
reproductive period: the time between the birth of the first and last fitter in
the twenty-fifth generation was more than double that in the first (440 days
as compared with 204 days). This was achieved by females becoming pregnant
at an increasingly early age, and also breeding later in fife. Since fitter size
remained approximately constant (c. 60 young per litter)9, this had the
effect that fecundity increased from an average of 23-1 young per female in the
first generation to an average of 63-3 young in the twenty-fifth generation.
  Mean adult weight increased fairly steadily to a gain of about 20% over the
first twenty-five generations, so that the rats became slightly heavier on
average than those of the long-established Wistar albino strain. Individual
rats attaining an adult weight considerably above the generation average
2io   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    berry


appeared in increasing numbers as the generations progressed. These
exceptionally large individuals were tentatively attributed to the segregation
of genes acting mainly during adult life. However the variability of body
weight at all ages decreased over the generations, presumably due to an
increase in genetical homogeneity. Body weight increased proportionally
more than body length over the first ten generations, and during this time the
pituitary gland increased in weight and the thyroid decreased.
  The docility of the rats increased over the generations, but even at the
forty-third generation they were not so tame as Wistar albinos. Farris and
Yeakel10 showed that King’s strain were highly susceptible to audiogenic
seizures, and were more emotional or fearful than Wistar albinos in a standard
open-field psychological test. The “captive-grey” rats often exhibited nervous
or savage behaviour (jumping, squealing and biting) towards humans. Farris
and Yeakel suggested that the different responses of the two strains might be
due to the genetical constitutions of the founding members of each. Keeler
and King11 have attempted to analyse the consequence of genetical substitutions
in King’s “captive-grey” strain by studying differences between mutants and
non-mutants for eight mutations which appeared in the strain (six affecting
coat colour or hair structure, one producing waltzing behaviour, and one
shortening the tail). Each of the sub-strains derived from different mutants
exhibited a characteristic behaviour, and each produced a range of anatomical
modifications in mean gland weights or skeletal measurements. The con¬
clusions were that the characteristics of the “fully-laboratorized” Wistar
albino strain could have been achieved by substitution of the hooded, black
(non-agouti) and albino allelomorphs into the “captive-grey” genotype, the
most important one being that of the black allelomorph. (For example, 73%
of blacks tickled on the nose with a fine brush exhibited no rage-reaction, as
compared with only 15% of their agouti sibs12.)
  Now these findings cannot distinguish between the pleiotropic effects of a
gene and close linkage of a gene with loci affecting temperament and be¬
haviour. Keeler was inclined to accept the first explanation, largely because
eighteen of the more well-known strains of laboratory rats were homozygous
for black, seemingly too great a number to have acquired the allelomorph by
chance incorporation. However, neither Stone13 nor Bendig and Braun14 could
find any difference in response between coloured and albino segregants in
various behavioural tests, and Broadhurst15 found that black animals of an
F2 generation were more timid than their agouti sibs. It would appear,
therefore, that the agouti locus is more likely to be linked with genes affecting
behaviour than to affect it directly.
  Another approach to the domestication of animals is to compare domestica¬
ted with wild forms. Richter16 has done this for the Norway rat, comparing
rats trapped around Baltimore city with Wistar albinos. He found no obvious
differences between the two forms as regards external appearance, structure of
skeleton or growth rate to about 3°o days. After this, the wild rats grew
                    The genetical implications of domestication in animals    211


faster and attained a heavier final weight. The greatest differences were in the
weights of the internal organs, endocrine glands especially, which were
generally lighter in the laboratory rats. In particular, the adrenals of the
laboratory animals weighed on average only one quarter to one half of their
weight in the wild animals, the biggest difference being in the extent of the
cortex. This anatomical difference had physiological consequences in that
wild rats could not survive for long after adrenalectomy, even when given
additional salt, whereas most laboratory rats did survive. The deaths were
quite sudden and appeared to result from an inability to cope even with
normal laboratory stresses. On the other hand, the glomerular zone of the
adrenal cortex has a mineral salt regulating and conserving function, and
wild rats were able to tolerate a diet with a low salt content which was
deleterious to laboratory rats.
  The adrenal lipids of laboratory rats were easily depleted by fighting or
X-irradiation, but these stresses had no apparent effect on the adrenal lipid
content of wild rats. The greater secretory capability of the latter probably
explains the fact that wild rats are little affected by gonadectomy, whereas
laboratory rats treated thus show an almost complete cessation of spontaneous
activity, although this is restorable by treatment with cortisone. It is interest¬
ing that these hormonal differences are exactly those which might be expected
as a correlated consequence of selecting for earlier and more efficient breeding
in domesticated rats (see below).



      Changes (Cmimicking” domestication

The Norway rat increased its body weight by a fifth in the first twenty-five
generations of domestication. Since different parts of the body have different
growth rates, this means that there is plenty of possibility for change in
proportions producing many of the changes discussed by Zeuner17. A factor
enhancing such allometric changes is that one of the most potent effects of
domestication in any species is selection for earlier sexual maturity by breed¬
ing from the first maturing young18. However, extremely rapid change in
body size may occur under natural conditions completely independently of
domestication. This is most apparent when the stabilizing influence of gene
flow is removed from a species, usually when it colonizes an island19. Foster20
has shown that in general larger animals (carnivores, artiodactyls and lago-
morphs) decrease in size when isolated, while smaller animals (rodents)
increase. This tendency is well illustrated by the races of rabbits (Oryctolagus
cuniculus) and field-mice (.Apodemus sylvaticus) on islands round the British
coast. Island rabbits may be about 20% lighter than their mainland neigh¬
bours21, while island field-mice may be twice the size of their neighbours22.
Moreover, these size differences may arise quickly: the house mouse (Mus
musculus) on the Welsh island of Skokholm have been isolated for only
     212   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals         berry




                                                               < h;
                                                                     in
                                                               u <        <L>
                                                                     cc   >
                                                               o I— 'in
                                                                     CO
                                                               O P <u
                                                               uj m
                                                                     cn
                                                                          o
                                                               tcZ
                                                                          73
                                                                          C
                                                               Z Q        rd
                                                               2>-
                                                               I-         "a3 £
                                                               o
                                                               LU <
                                                               _J <_)
                                                               W  P nJ
                                                               cn LU E
                                                                     X    o
                                                               LO I— D
                                                               X          03 _C
                                                               O
                                                               CJ         CD i-
                                                               (S)
                                                                          c oa
                                                               X          X? 03
                                                               o          03
                                                               o                CD




                                                                                     CD
                                                                                          in
                                                                . Li-           u
                                                                                2    2  zj
                                                               CQ o                  a> o  LJ
                                                                    03 £                CD
                                                                                     & >>
                                                               ^15 M—
                                                                   — jC
                                                                                     -Q N
                                                                                        O
                                                               >i| £'l               - E £
                                                                                     m o
                                                                         <U JC
                                                                          0» CD
                                                               “lL
                                                                    c
                                                                    £ S "2 £
                                                               g° o g rt m c
                                                               °-z
                                                               qQ            r=s .Q
                                                                    X ° CL> U o
                                                               < |5 <     03 XJ .tZ in
                                                                                      a>
                                                               ljS       JD -P ~ 'tz
                                                                                  Q) ’c
                                                                          5 C         03
                                                               s|   tr C ■3
                                                                          u^  Q m< E
                                                                              2
                                                                    z'5^8 ■o
                                                               l£ O u 2       & <D c
                                                                          E in cc rt




                                                               LU
<                                                              _J
                                                               m
cc                                                             < <=> z
                  (BuipBajBas sqdjouuoiaipe p jaquunu ’sm)     Cin
                                                               uj >: 2
                                                               Qh-b
3                     AimaviavA ivoiibnho jo iNnowv            CnO <
                    The genetical implications of domestication in animals   213


seventy years, but they are 20% longer and heavier than their closest main¬
land relatives23. There seems little doubt that increased size is an adaptive
character for small mammals on islands24, and that there is sufficient size
variation present in natural populations to enable the mean size of individuals
to be fairly rapidly adjusted by natural selection25.
  The analogy between the origins and characteristics of island and domesti¬
cated races can be pushed some way26: both experience greatly restricted
gene-flow with the bulk of their relatives; both undergo adaptation to a
specialized environment; and this adaptation is largely dependent upon the
genetical variation available in the founding members of the form in ques¬
tion27. This means that different organisms will differ in their responses to the
same conditions (e.g. change of size of rabbits and mice on islands) making
it impossible to formulate a general rule of the changes expected when a
common selective pressure (such as domestication) is applied. Furthermore,
the response to the same pressure will depend on the available allelomorphs
in the gene-pool, and may differ from locality to locality. For example, DDT
resistance in house-flies has arisen independently in many different parts
of the world—and by at least four different biochemical (or genetical)
mechanisms28; the tail of house mice is a heat regulating organ and becomes
shorter relative to body length northwards through the British Isles—but
in the Faeroes the tail is 20% longer than in Shetland mice, and is approxi¬
mately the same length as in southern English mice29. The consequences
of these considerations is that even within a single species, it may be extremely
difficult to lay down criteria to distinguish between domesticated and non-
domesticated forms. Zeuner regarded wild coat colour as uncommon and
piebaldness as distinctive of domesticated forms, but many laboratory strains
of the Norway rat have wild-type coat colour; Searle30 has described a dine
in blotched tabby in Western European cats; Hebridean field mouse races all
arose from the same stock yet differ considerably in their coat colour and
extent of ventral white colouration31; and wild house mice are polymorphic
for allelomorphs affecting belly colour and spotting32. Tooth loss may have
nothing to do with a trend towards smaller jaws33. Even pathological allelo¬
morphs can be common in non-domesticated forms: this is well known in
man34, but high frequencies of deleterious allelomorphs are often found in
other forms (most American populations of house mice contain many
recessive lethal allelomorphs of the t-series—Dunn; over 70% of Skokholm
house mice have spina bifida occulta—Berry)35.



      Genetical diversity of populations

We are still suffering a hangover in our thought from the old type concept of a
species, and its genetical corollary that individuals are homozygous at
virtually all loci. This “classical” idea of population genetics implied that
214   Part 11 Domestication and exploitation of animals     berry

natural variation is extremely limited, and in the context of archaeology any
specimens which “deviated” (usually on subjective grounds) from the
normal, or which bore a resemblance to modem domesticated forms, could
be regarded as evidence for domestication. It is becoming increasingly clear
that homozygosity is not the normal state of affairs for many loci36, and that
perhaps 10-20% of loci are normally heterozygous37. This means that a
considerable amount of variation will arise in every generation as a con¬
sequence of segregation and recombination38, although most of the extreme
variants will be eliminated before they can contribute to the next generation39.
As a consequence exact and rapid adaptive response to environmental change
is possible and inevitable40. Unless this change involves selection of an
allelomorph with obvious phenotypic effects, this adaptation might not be
easily detectable. On the other hand, correlated phenotypic responses due to
linkage are almost certain (cf. the apparent pleiotropic effects of non-agouti in
the Norway rat).
  Usually domestication involves selection for some desirable quality,
such as egg laying ability, coat texture or meat yield. Most artificial selection
will produce a distinctive phenotype. However there is no reason to believe
that domestication per se will alter the phenotype41 or even a major part of the
genotype42. The Norway rat illustrates this point well.
  Another example is the difficulty of distinguishing between the skulls of
coyotes and domestic dogs, even though these forms are normally regarded
as belonging to two species (Canis latrans and C. familiaris respectively).
Howard43 has described a method for separating the two, but it is based on a
fairly sophisticated character (the ratio between the palatal width and the
length of the upper molar tooth-row), and Howard had available 194 skulls
of known identity. Domestication is primarily the establishment of a stock
breeding under manageable conditions (this is exemplified by the husbandry
of animals in zoos)44, and hence a domesticated form is really a local ecotype
of a species. As such it is adapted to a greater or less extent for human use, and
may have become too specialized for life in the wild45.
  I began this paper by asking two questions. The rather destructive answer
to these questions must be that it is not possible to recognize any traits which
inevitably accompany domestication, and, even worse, most of the criteria by
which domestication has been claimed to be recognizable, may occur as a
result of processes which have nothing to do with domestication. This does
not mean that domestication changes can never be recognized in any particular
well-known form (such as pig or sheep), but it does mean that it is impossible
to extrapolate from (say) cows to horses or even between extreme forms of the
same species (such as Indian and European cattle). The conclusion and moral
to which we are forced is that domestication should never be claimed from
archaeological material unless there is a clear and continuous lineage with
modern forms, or unless cultural remains provide incontrovertible evidence
of domestication46.
                The genetical implications of domestication in animals     215




Notes
 1 See Bokonyi, S., this volume, pp. 219-29.
 2 See Bokonyi, S. ibid, and Chaplin, R. E., this volume, pp. 231-45.
 3 Salisbury, Sir E. (1961). Weeds and Aliens. London; Heiser, C. B. (1965).
   Sunflowers, weeds and cultivated plants, in Baker, H. G. and Stebbins,
   G. L. (eds.) The Genetics of Colonizing Species. New York and London;
   Jones, D. A. (1967). Polymorphism, plants and natural populations, Sci.
   Prog., Oxf., 55, pp. 379-400; Stebbins, G. L. (1967). Adaptive radiation
   and trends of evolution in higher plants. Evolutionary Biology, 1, pp.
    101-42.
 4 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
   Chapter 3; Klatt, B. (1927). Entstehung der Haustiere, in Baur, E. and
   Hartmann, M. (eds.) Handbuch der Vererbungswissenchaft, 3. Berlin.
 5 Robinson, R. (1965). Genetics of the Norway Rat. London.
 6 Donaldson, H. H. (1924). The Rat: Data and Reference Tables. 2nd ed.
   Philadelphia.
 7 Richter, C. P. (1954). The effects of domestication and selection on the
   behaviour of the Norway rat, J. nat. Cancer Inst., 15, pp. 727-38.
 8 King, H. D. and Donaldson, H. H. (1929). Life processes and size of body
   and organs of the gray Norway rat during ten generations in captivity,
   Amer. anat. Mem., No. 14; King, H. D. (1939). Life processes in gray
   Norway rats during fourteen years in captivity, Amer. anat. Mem., No. 17.
 9 Batten, C. A. and Berry, R. J. (1967). Parental mortality in wild-caught
   house mice, J. anim. Ecol., 36, pp. 453-63.
10 Farris, E. J. and Yeakel, E. H. (1943). The susceptibility of albino and
   gray Norway rats to audiogenic seizures, J. comp. Psychol., 35, pp. 73-80;
   Farris, E. J. and Yeakel, E. H. (1945). Emotional behaviour of gray
   Norway and Wistar albino rats, J. comp. Psychol., 38, pp. 109-18.
11 Keeler, C. E. and King, H. D. (1942). Multiple effects of coat colour
   genes in the Norway rat, with special reference to temperament and
   domestication,^ comp. Psychol., 34, pp. 241-50.
12 Keeler, C. E. (1942). The association of the black (non-agouti) gene with
   behaviour in the Norway rat, J. Hered., 33, pp. 371-84.
13 Stone, C. P. (1932). Wildness and savageness in rats of different strains,
   in Lashley, K. S. (ed.) Studies in the Dynamics of Behaviour. Chicago.
14 Bendig, A. W. and Braun, H. W. (1951). The influence of the genotype on
   the retention of a maze habit in the rat following electroshock convulsions,
   J. comp. Physiol. Psychol., 44, pp. 112-17.
15 Broadhurst, P. L. (i960). Studies in psychogenetics: applications of bio¬
   metrical genetics to the inheritance of behaviour, in Eysenck, K. J. (ed.)
   Experiments in Personality. I. Psychogenetics and Psychopharmacology.
   London.
16 Richter, C. P. (1954). ibid.
17 De Beer, G. R. (1958). Embryos and Ancestors. 3rd ed. Oxford.
18 Spurway, H. (1952). Can wild animals be kept in captivity ?, New Biology,
   13, pp. 11-30.
19 Mayr, E. (1954). Change of genetic environment and evolution, in Huxley,
   J., Hardy, A. C. and Ford, E. B. (eds.) Evolution as a Process. London.
   Kurten, B. (1959). Rates of evolution in fossil mammals, Cold Spring
   Harbour Symp. quant. Biol., 24, pp. 205-15.
20 Foster, J. B. (1964). Evolution of mammals on islands, Nature, Bond., 202,
   pp. 234-5.
21 Lloyd, H. G. Personal communication.
22 Berry, R. J., Evans, I. M. and Sennitt, B. F. C. (1967). The relationships
216   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals        berry


         and ecology of Apodemus sylvaticus from the Small Isles of the Inner
         Hebrides,$Scotland, J. Zool. Lond., 152, pp. 333-46; Berry, unpublished.
      23 Berry, R. J. (1964). The evolution of an island population of the house
         mouse. Evolution, 18, pp. 468-83.
      24 Cook, L. M. (1961). The edge effect in population genetics, Amer. Nat.,
         95, pp. 295-307; Corbet, G. B. (1961). Origin of the British insular races of
         small mammals and of the “Lusitanian” fauna, Nature, Lond., 191, pp.
         1037-40.
      25 Crowcroft, P. and Rowe, F. P. (1961). The weights of wild house mice
         (.Mus musculus L.) living in confined colonies, Proc. zool. Soc., Lond., 136,
         pp. 177-85.
      26 Baker, H. G. and Stebbins, G. L. (1965). (eds.) The Genetics of Colonizing
         Species. New York and London.
      27 Mayr. E. (1954). ibid.; Berry, R. J. (1967). Genetical changes in mice and
         men, Eug. Rev., 59, pp. 78-96; Parsons, P. A., Hosgood, S. M. W. and Lee,
         B. T. O. (1967). Polygenes and polymorphism, Molec. Gen. Genet., 99,
         pp. 165-70.
      28 W. H. C. (1964). Genetics of vectors and insecticide resistance, Wld. Hlth.
         Org. techn.. Rep. Ser., 268, 40 pp.
      29 Berry, R. J. (1964). ibid.; Berry, R. J. (1967). ibid.
      30 Searle, A. G. (1964). The gene-geography of cats. J. Cat Genet., 1 (5), pp.
         18-24.
      31 Delany, M. I. (1964). Variation in the Long-tailed field-mouse (.Apodemus
         sylvaticus L.) in north-west Scotland. I. Comparison of individual
         characters, Proc. roy. Soc. B., 161, pp. 191-9; Berry, R. T., Evans, I. M.
         and Sennitt, B. F. C. (1967). ibid.
      32 Dunn, L. C., Beasley, A. B. and Tinker, H. (i960). Polymorphisms in
         populations of wild house mice,J. Mammal., 41, pp. 220-9.
      33 Brothwell, D. R., Carbonell, V. M. and Goose, D. H. (1963). Congenital
         absence of teeth in human populations, in Brothwell, D. R. (ed.) Dental
         Anthropology. London; Berry, R. J. (1968). The biology of non-metrical
         variation in mice and men, in Brothwell, D. R. (ed.) The Skeletal Biology
         of Earlier Human Populations. London.
      34 Polman, A. (1950). Anencephaly, spina bifida and hydrocephaly. A
         contribution to our knowledge of the causal genesis of congenital mal¬
         formations, Genetica, 25, pp. 29-78; Blumberg, B. S. (1961). (ed.)
         Genetic Polymorphisms and Geographic Variations in Disease. New York
         and London; Berry, R. J. (1961). Genetically controlled degeneration of
         the nucleus pulposus in the mouse, J. Bone jt. Surg., 43B, pp. 387-93;
         Berry, R. J. (1967). ibid.
      35 Dunn, L. C. (1955). Widespread distribution of mutant alleles (r-alleles)
         in populations of wild house mice. Nature, Lond., 176, pp. 1275-6; Berry,
         R. J. (1964). ibid.
      36 Lerner, I. M. (1954). Genetic Homeostasis. Edinburgh.
      37 Harris, H. (1966). Enzyme polymorphisms in man, Proc. roy. Soc. B., 164,
         pp. 298-310); Lewontin, R. C. and Hubby, J. L. (1966). A molecular
         approach to the study of genic heterozygosity in natural populations. II.
         Amount of variation and degree of heterozygosity in natural populations of
         Drosophila pseudoobscura. Genetics, 54, pp. 595-609; Milkman, R. D.
         (i967)- Heterosis as a major cause of heterozygosity in nature, Genetics, 55,
         PP- 493-5-
      38 Mather, K. (1943). Polygenic inheritance and natural selection, Biol. Rev.,
         r8, pp. 32-64; Mather, K. (1953). The genetical structure of populations.
         Symp. Soc. exp. Biol., 7, pp. 76-95.
      39 Haldane, J. B. S. (1959). Natural selection, in Bell, P. R. (ed.) Darwin's
         Biological Work. Cambridge; Berry, R. J. and Crothers, J. H. (1968).
               The genetical implications of domestication in animals      217


   Stabilizing selection in the Dog whelk (Nucella lapillus), J. Zool., Lond.,
   i55> PP- 5-17-
40 Kettlewell, H. B. D. (1961). The phenomenon of industrial melanism in
   Lepidoptera, Ann. Rev. Entomol., 6, pp. 245-62; Dobzhansky, T. (1963).
   Genetics of natural populations. XXXIII. A progress report on genetic
   changes in populations of Drosophila pseudoobscura and Drosophila persi-
   milis in a locality in California, Evolution, 17, pp. 333-9.
41 Bader, R. S. (1956). Variability in wild and inbred mammalian popula¬
   tions, Quart. J. Fla. Acad. Sci., 19, pp. 14-34.
42 Fisher, R. A. (1935). Dominance in poultry, Phil. Trans, roy. Soc. B., 225,
   pp. 195-226.
43 Howard, W. E. (1949). A means to distinguish skulls of coyotes and
   domestic dogs, J. Mammal., 30, pp. 169-71.
44 Spurway, H. (1952). ibid.
45 Leopold, A. S. (1944). The nature of heritable wildness in turkeys.
   Condor, 46, pp. 133-97; Gillett, J. D. (1967). Natural selection and feeding
   speed in a blood-sucking insect, Proc. roy. Soc. B., 167, pp. 316-29.
46 My thanks are due to Mr. D. R. Brothwell, Professor H. Griineberg, Dr.
   P. A. Jewell and Dr. A. G. Searle for their comments and criticisms, and
   to Mr. A. J. Lee for drawing the figure.
      S. BOKONYI

      Archaeological problems and methods of recognizing
      animal domestication

Domestication is an extremely complicated process. In essence it is nothing
other than man’s special interference in the life of certain animal species, but
this interference has been really varied. Although man has interfered in the life
of some animal species by hunting them or driving them out from their
living places, (for example, the cave bear in the Pleistocene) from a very early
date, domestication is an interference of a quite different kind. There is no
doubt that the purpose of earliest domestication was to secure animal protein
reserve for the human population, that the domesticated animals served as
living food conserves, and finally that man killed these animals just as he did his
other quarry, the wild animals. But capturing animals, keeping them in
corrals and killing them at the appropriate time does not amount to domesti¬
cation; domestication implies something more. Its essential criterion is
that man intends to breed the captured individuals of a certain wild species.
The word “domestication” presumes the propagation of animals that man
keeps in captivity, or more exactly man’s breeding of animals under artificial
conditions. And this is a real difference in comparison to the wild, hunted
animals, for in connection with the latter, primitive man had only one
purpose: to kill as many of them as possible.'
  I would define the essence of domestication as: 5 the capture and taming by
man of animals of a species with particular behavioural characteristics, their
removal from their natural living area and breeding community, and their
maintenance under controlled breeding conditions for profit.'
  In this respect it seems useful to examine the main phases of animal breed¬
ing that began with domestication. One can distinguish two main phases
(i) animal keeping, and (2) animal breeding.
 1 Animal keeping is the primitive form of animal breeding without purpose¬
ful selection or the control of feeding. Its most important characteristics are
that: (a) in a given population there is only one breed, and (b) the domestic
animals are of a primitive type and—in the case of mammals—their size is
small in comparison to that of the wild form. The origins of selective breeding,
220   Part II    Domestication and exploitation of animals    B0K0NYI



 however, do go back to prehistoric times, for with the introduction of castra¬
 tion of some males (from the late neolithic on) man was practising a certain
selection (i.e. he selected some males for breeding and excluded others).
 However, this process was not conscious selection for higher productivity
 (e.g. for size, strength, speed, meat production, milk yield, wool, etc.).'
    The basis of real 'animal breeding is purposeful selective breeding and the
 control of both quantity and quality of feeding. It begins when man treats his
 domestic animals as individuals and not only as a herd. The beginnings of
 real animal breeding varied in time for different species^ it started earlier for
horse and dog than for cattle. It was first applied to all domestic animals in
classical Greece and was widely practised by the Romans. With the fall of the
Roman Empire, real animal breeding disappeared but it has become dominant
again since the Late Middle Ages.'The best criteria for recognizing this
advanced phase are: (a) that different breeds live together in a population,
(b) that the size of animals increases but dwarf breeds also appear, and (c) that
the productivity of animals increases.'
    Domestication as a process involves three main factors: the man who
carries it out, the wild animal that has been domesticated, and the domesti¬
cated animal that is the result. At first, one might think that it is only man
who is the positive factor: he influences the animal, he transforms it from the
wild state into the domesticated one, he multiplies its numbers, he takes it to
distant regions, he restricts or kills off its wild forms, etc. This is undoubtedly
the main line of development but beside this the whole process includes a
range of complex interactions. These influences can be clearly seen not only
on the domesticated animal—both on the individuals and on the whole
populations—but also on the wild ancestors and even on man, on human
populations and on the whole society.
    There is no need to enumerate in detail these effects and changes for other
papers in this book deal with them. But it is useful to examine the whole
picture and in this way to try to determine for example what kind of differ¬
ences existed between the fauna of prehistoric sites with animal keeping
(apart from hunting) and the fauna of early sites with local domestication
(apart from hunting and with or without animal keeping). It would be very
interesting to examine questions like: what kind of factors determine the
animal husbandry of a certain prehistoric culture, or in what ways are the
qualitative and quantitative features of animal husbandry characteristic of a
certain prehistoric culture or period, or to what extent can the origin, relation¬
ship, and movement of animals and peoples be determined from the type and
development of animal husbandry and from its relation to hunting, etc. These
questions have been rather neglected in recent research, and are therefore very
well worth discussing.
  With regard to the first question, there is certain evidence for animal
keeping on a prehistoric settlement if:
             Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication   221

1 the proportion of age groups of a domesticable species is not the same as
  found normally in the wild population;
2 the proportions of the sexes of a domesticable species is not the same as
  found normally in the wild population;
3 domesticated species appear which have no wild ancestors in that particular
  region, at least since the Pleistocene;
4 morphological changes appear in domesticated animals;
5 there are artistic representations of domesticated animals;
6 there are objects associated with animal husbandry.

Among these criteria the last four are the most reliable but the first two are
the most interesting. The last four require that a certain time has passed
during which either domesticated species spread to distant areas, or morpho¬
logical changes developed1. Although it is well known nowadays that the time
required for such a development is not very long (in South-west Asia hornless
sheep and goats with twisted horns appeared as early as the eighth millennium
B.C., and longifrons-/brachyceros-/cattle were identified in the Carpathian
Basin in the sixth millennium B.C., and a good example of how fast domestic
animals have spread is that sheep and goat and probably pig arrived in
south-eastern Europe from their centre of domestication in South-west Asia
as early as the seventh millennium B.C.), it is vital that reliable methods for
distinguishing domesticated animals from their wild ancestors in the early
period of domestication, when morphological changes had not yet developed,
should be found. At the same time it is vital that such methods should be
found for those species where morphological changes occurred only thousands
of years after their first domestication (e.g. the horse).
  Arcikhowski2 was the first to attempt to distinguish wild and domesticated
forms on the basis of differences in the proportions of age and sex groups.
According to Arcikhowski tthe appearance of very old animals, the equal
proportion of males and females and the lack of vertebrae and breast-bones
indicated a wild population, while on the other hand the lack of old animals,
the overwhelming majority of females (a great part of the males were killed as
young animals or castrated; castration was introduced in animal keeping quite
early) and the occurrence of whole skeletons indicated a domesticated
population. 1 This is without doubt a very intelligent principle by which to
distinguish populations especially because it associates the differences in age
and sex proportions with the occurrence or lack of certain kinds of bones (the
hunter leaves the parts of the body which are poor at the place of killing,
whereas domesticated animals are killed actually on the sites and their whole
skeletons are therefore found in situ), and it could probably be extended to
the study of the very early domestication of sheep and goats.
   Perkins3 deduced the domesticated state of the sheep of the proto-neolithic
(10,870 ± 300 b.p.) Zawi Chemi Shanidar from the sudden increase of the
proportion of immature animals. Coon4 was the first who advanced the thesis
222   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    bokonyi


that a high proportion of young animal bones was a proof of a domesticated
population, and this has increasingly become an axiom particularly in Near
Eastern archaeology. But Hopkins5 has proved by statistical methods that in
this respect there were significant differences between the uppermost
(Bx == proto-neolithic) and the next (C = Baradostian) layer of Shanidar
Cave, and that the difference between layer C and the layers at Zawi Chemi
Shanidar was also significant, but that the difference between the lowermost
layer D (Mousterian!) of the cave and the top two layers of Zawi Chemi was
not significant. “No one, I think, would argue that the Neanderthals from
Shanidar Cave were domesticating sheep, and yet statistically they may have
been killing a high percentage of immature animals”6, but it is possible that the
high proportion of young animals was somehow connected with a special
type of hunting. Despite this, I am of the opinion that an increase in the
number of immature animals in an early neolithic site shows (however
incompletely) evidence of domestication, simply because in somewhat later
periods of the neolithic this has occurred together with morphological
changes in undoubtedly domesticated populations. I am convinced that it
would be useful to combine this method—like that of Arcikhowski7—with
the study of changes in sex groups and of the spectrum of bone kinds.
  We have so far looked at the evidence which shows that animals were kept
on prehistoric settlements. The next step is to determine what kinds of proof
of local domestication can be found in the material found on a prehistoric site.
This has a special importance not only for the determination of early domesti¬
cation but also for secondary domestication in later times. It is well known
that the progress of domestication did not end with the taming of the first
animals; on the contrary, as the techniques of domestication spread man tried
to tame the wild animals of new and different regions. On the other hand,
throughout the neolithic man was forced to domesticate, because at that
period when animal husbandry was still incipient and hunting was gradually
on the decrease it would have been impossible to supply the growing human
population with meat and at the same time to increase the domestic stock.
 Moreover neolithic man recognized quite early that domesticated stock was
 the basis of “wealth”, and he attempted to raise it as efficiently as he could.
 And this led again to domestication. And at last when at the end of the
 neolithic he discovered new uses for his domesticated animals (milk, wool,
 draught, etc.) there broke out a “fever of domestication” in the whole of
 Europe8. When at the end of this “fever” the aurochs, the wild ancestor of
 the most important domesticated animals of Central and Western Europe at
 that time, was getting rarer man switched over to the swine which has been
 domesticated till the most recent times. Despite this switch the aurochs was
 still domesticated after prehistoric times, albeit very rarely. Virgil mentioned
 that in North Italy after a cattle epizootic the peasants captured and domesti¬
 cated aurochs to replace their domestic stock. Likewise, mediaeval chronicles
 record that an aurochs bull, which was captured and tamed in Hungary, was
              Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication     223

used to draw in the heavy foundation-stones of the cathedral of Strassbourg9
and its horn still hung on one of the pillars of the cathedral till the Great
French Revolution.
  And now the question: what is the evidence for local domestication in the
material of a site ?

1 Remains of both wild and domesticated forms on the site.
2 The existence of transitional forms between the wild ancestor and the
  domesticated animal.
3 Changes in the proportions of age and sex groups in the wild form.
4 Representations of scenes of capture.

The first point needs no further explanation. As regards the second point,
transitional forms can be of two different kinds: (a) hybrids of the wild and
domesticated form, (b) newly domesticated individuals (more common). If
there exist skulls, or larger skull fragments, in the case of cattle it is not too
difficult to distinguish the two types10. While the second type is a small-scale
form of the wild cattle, the first type shows none of the well determined and
rather standard proportions of the wild form. It has for example large horns
on a small skull or, exactly the contrary, long horns with a wavy frontal ridge
between the horns, or an uneven forehead, etc. (Such a disproportion was
probably characteristic of the whole body but until now we have no whole
skeletons to prove this.)
   In the case of local domestication, transitional individuals bridge the
differences between the wild and domestic forms of a particular animal
species. For sheep and goats this question has yet to be studied; however
such types should be identifiable at least in the form, cross-section, twisting,
etc., of the horns. However, in the case of pig and cattle, transitional indi¬
viduals can already be very well identified. In the case of pig and cattle,
domestication causes a considerable decrease of size which can be recognized
in the extremity bones which are found abundantly on prehistoric settle¬
ments. In the cattle material of a settlement without local cattle domestication
(Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid, Switzerland, early neolithic, Cortaillod cul¬
ture11) there is a gap between the series of measurements of wild and domestic
cattle. On the other hand, on a site with large-scale cattle domestication
(Berettyoszentmarton, Hungary, late neolithic, Herpaly12) there are many
transitional forms. On the frequency diagrams for the cattle bones of this
site these animals are transitional between the wild and domesticated cattle.
The differences between the two sites are shown in Table 1.
   Transitional forms like these occur also among the pigs of prehistoric
European sites but as the pig was generally far rarer than cattle in pre¬
historic sites, its domestication was less important, and its numbers were
much smaller.
   On sites with local domestication there are interesting changes in the
proportions of age and sex of wild formsi Modem experiments prove, and
224    Part // Domestication and exploitation of animals           bokonyi


  Metacarpus
  Breadth of proximal end                   50-51 52-53 54-55 56-57 58-59 60-61 62-63
                         f
Seeberg, Burgaschisee- domesticated           221                 4000

  Sud,0)                 \wild                000                 0000
„      ,       ,    ...^ f.-
                           domesticated       000                 13            3      3
Berettyoszentmarton w -                       000                 0000
                         \ wild

  Metacarpus
  Breadth of proximal end                   64-65 66-67 68-69 70-71 72-73 74-75
„ ,      _              , f domesticated      000000
Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud < w-^               013420

„      ,      ,          I
                   ... domesticated
Berettyoszentmartonw<,
                                              340000
                                              o     o      1      5      1      1

  Metacarpus
  Breadth of proximal end                   76-77 78-79 80-81 82-83 84-85 86-87
                                              000                 000
Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud^d^est*cated

Beretty6szentmarton(4)
                         {   domesticated
                             wild
                                              100
                                              000
                                              360
                                                                  000
                                                                  000
                                                                  1 o 1

Table 1
  (а) Boessneck, J., Jequier, P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud. Die
      Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).
  (б) Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn und das Problem der
      Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung., 14, pp. 175-214; Bokonyi, S. and
      Kubasiewicz, M. (1961). Neolithische Tiere Polens und Ungarns in Ausgrabungen, I. Das
      Hausrind. Budapest-Szczecin.


there is also prehistoric evidence for this, that only young animals can be
domesticated. Therefore prehistoric man had to capture young animals to
tame them. But, on the other hand, the wild adult individuals tried to protect
their young, and man had therefore to kill the adults in order to capture the
young. Consequently it is logical that in the material of sites with large-scale
domestication there should be only a few (or even no) bones of immature wild
individuals and that the overwhelming majority of the domesticable wild
species should be adult, mature or even senile animals. And this is exactly
what we find. For example at Berettyoszentmarton (with large-scale cattle
domestication) among 1106 aurochs bones of identifiable age there were only
ninety-five (8-6%) immature individuals and ion (91-4%) of adult and
senile animals. On the other hand, at Seeberg-Burgaschisee-Siid (without
cattle domestication) 26% (judging from the mandibles, even 55%) of the
aurochs bones were of immature individuals13. This latter example shows
clearly that this type of selection did not operate and that, on the contrary,
the hunters tried to kill the young animals which were the easier prey.
   In the wild the proportion of male and female animals is normally 1:1.
This ratio should also exist in the bone material of the wild ancestors of the
domesticated animals in prehistoric sites. But in one form of hunting14
which eventually led to domestication, man began to husband the wild herd
just like his domesticated stock; he protected the herd against its natural
enemies (amongst which were other human hordes), saved the young and
female individuals, and if he wanted to kill any he chose the old animals, and
              Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication     225
                                   1

 first of all the superfluous males. There is a good example of this at the site of
 Asiab (West Iran, c. eighth millennium b.c.) with its very beginning of goat
 domestication. At this site judging from horn cores, there were almost only
 male individuals among the wild goats. Or again in Berettyoszentmarton the
 greatest number of the aurochs bones were of bulls, while in Seeberg-
 Burgaschisse-Siid bones of aurochs cows were probably in the majority.
    As for representations of the capture of animals these are comparatively
 late. For example, the famous golden cups of Vaphio (1550-1450 B.C.) show
the capture of bulls at a time when cattle had been domesticated for at least
4500 years (and it is not even sure if the bulls represented were really wild
 animals).
    It is obvious that of the four criteria mentioned above it is the second one
 which is of decisive importance. In other words dt is the occurrence of
 transitional individuals which is the best evidence for local domestication.
 Domestic stock, individuals with well-determined criteria of advanced domes¬
 tication are theoretically not essential.) But only theoretically, because in
 practice there are some sites where such an initial stage of domestication is
 not observable. The same is true for the changes in the proportions of age
 and sex groups of the wild forms. These changes are associated only with that
 type of domestication which developed from hunting. But since the domesti¬
 cation of the most important animals has its origin in hunting, there can be no
 doubt that these types of changes can be observed in the populations of wild
 ancestors if there is enough bone material available. (
    The third group of questions concerns the relations between man, human
population, society and domestication and animal husbandry. To study these
 questions it is necessary to examine the animal husbandry of the whole
prehistoric and early historic population in a certain area. The Carpathian
Basin, and particularly Hungary, seems to be a good territory for this purpose.
The Carpathian Basin is a closed geographical unit, and Hungary has
roughly homogeneous environmental and climatic conditions. Furthermore,
and particularly important, the bone material of Hungary’s c. 400 pre¬
historic and early historic sites was studied with the same method and from
the same view points. (This material also served very well as a basis for
synthesizing the material of Central and Eastern Europe.) In these investiga¬
tions only the material from settlements was used, for it was this material
that accurately reflected not only the qualitative but also the quantitative
composition of the domesticated fauna. The essence of the method was
the study qualitatively, and above all quantitatively, of the species in the
domesticated fauna. They (together with the hunted fauna) give us valuable
information about the development of one of the most important sections of
the economy. It can be proved that the great periods of prehistory and early
history and many prehistoric cultures or groups of cultures, had their own
typical animal husbandry (which is reflected in the proportions of domesti¬
cated species). And this husbandry was at least as characteristic of them as
226   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals              bokonyi


the form or decoration of their pottery, etc. The great periods of prehistory
and of early history (and in some cases their sub-phases and even certain
cultures) can be very well distinguished from each other on the basis of the
development of their animal husbandry.
   The species composition of animal husbandry also yields information
about the relationship and migrations of cultures; e.g. the relations of the
neolithic of South-west Asia and that of Greece are well-known. At Argissa-
Maghula15 and Nea Nikomedeia16, the two early neolithic settlements in
Greece, with animal bones which have been identified, the proportions of
species in the domesticated fauna are the same: an animal husbandry based on
sheep and goat as in the early neolithic of South-west Asia. The domesticated
fauna contains at least 70% sheep and goat, while pig and catde (the latter in
all likelihood domesticated first in South-west Europe in the seventh millen¬
nium b.c.) are far less common, and dog seems to be extremely rare. The same
form of animal husbandry extended as far as the Northern Balkans and even
as far as the Carpathian Basin (see Table 2). But while the early neolithic
people of the Southern Balkans hardly hunted, in the wet and swampy
environment of the Carpathian Basin they acquired a quite considerable
part of their meat by hunting and fishing. The original type of animal
husbandry was deeply rooted in the traditions of the human population for
they clung to it even in an unfavourable environment (sheep and goat
were not animals of the swamps). And this is the best evidence to show that
in this case we are dealing with the migration northwards of a type of animal
husbandry together with a human group and not the simple taking over of a
particular domesticated species. Beyond the Carpathian Basin this type of
animal husbandry based on sheep and goat is not found.
   This alien form of animal husbandry was unable to develop further (for lack

                         Wild     Domesticated
                        animals     animals       Cattle   Sheep/goat     Pig      Dog
                           0/           0/          0/          0/         O/       0/
                           /o           /o          /o          /o         /o       /o
Argissa-Maghula(a)         0-92       99-08         4-76      84-15       9.99     0-18
  (Greece)
Nea Nikomedeia<t)          Too        93-00        14-55      70-45      14-77     0-23
  (Greece)
Ludas-Budzak             20-92        7908         13-13      86-13       0-37     0-37
  (Yugoslavia)
Maroslele-Pana           3296         67-04        26-52      70-16       1-66     i-66
  (Hungary)
Gyalaret                 2695         73-05        30-37      63-56       4-67     1-40
  (Hungary)
Roszke-Ludvar            59'iB        40-89        1796       76-41       1-64     399
  (Hungary)
Deszk-Olajkut             19-84       8o-i6        29-39      70-21       0-20     0-20
  (Hungary)

Table 2
  (a) Boessneck, J. (1961). Haustierfunde prakeramisch-neolithischer Zeit aus Thessalien,
       Z. Tierzucht. ZiichtBiol., 76, pp. 39-42.
  (£>) Higgs, E. S. (1962). The fauna of the early neolithic site at Nea Nikomedeia, Greek
       Macedonia, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 28, pp. 271—4.
             Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication         227

of domesticable wild forms of its leading elements, the sheep and goat) and
was unable to maintain itself later than the end of the first third of the
neolithic. From this time on cultures of local origin developed their own forms
of animal husbandry. These were based on cattle and pig, animals which had
their wild forms in the Carpathian Basin, and could therefore be domesticated
locally. In this type of animal husbandry, cattle were the leading element and
pig generally occupied the second place. These cultures practised large-scale
domestication, with which their hunting was also associated: aurochs was the
main hunted animal (see the second group of questions above: the adult
animals were killed and the young ones captured).
   The late neolithic cultures which had a local origin (Herpaly culture,
Lengyel culture, etc.) practised a similar form of animal husbandry. Their
settlements are, however, easily distinguishable from earlier ones on the basis
of the sudden increase of hunting. This was connected with a new “fever of
domestication” with a large-scale domestication of cattle.
   And so for every period and phase of Hungarian prehistory there is a
typical form of animal husbandry reflected in the particular proportions of
 the animal species.
   There is yet another question: what kind of information can the type of
 animal husbandry found tell us about the migrations of cultures or peoples ?
 There is another good example from the Carpathian Basin: during the
 Holocene there were three important south-eastern incursions into this
 region. The first was the Koros culture at the beginning of the neolithic, the
 second the Badener culture at the end of the Copper Age or at the beginning
 of the Bronze Age, and lastly the Turks at the end of the Middle Ages.
 Despite the gaps of three thousand years between these incursions all three
 brought with them exactly the same form of animal husbandry based on
 sheep and goats (see Table 3). The bone material of their settlements can
 only be distinguished by the domestic breeds kept on them, by the occurrence
 of horse and domestic birds on Turkish sites, and by the decrease in hunting.

                                  Domesti-
                         Wild      cated               Sheep/                  Horse/
                        animals   animals     Cattle    goat    Pig     Dog    birds
                          0/
                          /o      '
                                       0/
                                       /o
                                                0/
                                                /o
                                                         0/
                                                         /o
                                                                0/o/     0/
                                                                         /o
                                                                                 0/
                                                                                 /o

Koros cultura            33-60        66-40   21*00    77-31    0-72    0-97
  (average)
Budapest-Andor utca       6-8i        9319    34-31    41-72    22-58   1-29    —
  (Badener culture)
Buda-Pasha palace         1-03        9897    10-45    86-i6     0-35   0-48    2-56
  (Turkish)

 Table 3

  The proportions of species in a domesticated fauna also tell us something
about the way of life of certain human populations. It is quite clear that
nomadic peoples firstly breed animals which can easily be driven, while, on
the other hand, settled peoples keep mainly animals which can be confined. ^
228   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   bokonyi


Adaptation of animal husbandry to changes in ways of living is clearly seen
from the Early Middle Ages. From the point of view of animal husbandry the
early mediaeval settlements of Central and Eastern Europe can be divided into
two groups. The first group consists of the Slavonic and German villages and
towns, while the second group includes the Hungarian villages and the
settlements of certain newly settled peoples of the Pontic region. The animal
husbandry of the first group was characterized by having pig and cattle
(alternately) as its leading elements, whereas sheep and goat were much
rarer, and horse was either very rare or entirely absent. In the animal
husbandry of the second group, cattle or sheep/goat were the most common
domesticated animals, and the horse also was common, whereas pig was
extremely rare. Certain differences in the uses of the domesticated animals
existed in the two groups. For example, the horse was not eaten by people of
the first group, whereas it was eaten by people of the second group, and
whilst for the people of the first group cattle were almost exclusively
draught animals, they were also kept for meat by people of the second group,
etc. There was no essential difference between the animal husbandry of the
Slavs and Germans in the first group or that of the Hungarians and Pontic
peoples in the second group. This shows that the differences between the
animal husbandry of the two groups were not of ethnic origin, but existed
simply as a result of changes in the way of life, slowly followed by changes in
the animal husbandry of the newly settled peoples.
   Since Celtic and Roman times setdement types and the class-structure
have also caused changes in the animal husbandry. There are fundamental
differences between the domesticated fauna of Celtic villages and towns
(oppidums) and that of Roman villas, castles, military stations or native
villages. (It was in the Celtic towns, Roman villas and castles that the first
beginnings of a civilized way of life occurred, while in Celdc villages, Roman
military stations and native villages under Roman rule, people continued
their prehistoric way of life.) In the Middle Ages there were sharp differences
between the animal husbandry of villages, towns, royal or episcopal residences
and the nobleman’s manor-houses. The animal husbandry of villages always
lagged behind that of towns, etc., but in addition to this the animal husbandry
of towns demanded emphasis on those species which did not need too much
place and did not require too much food (e.g. pig, hen). In general it has been
the hen which has been the domestic animal of urbanization since the Celts. A
difference caused by the class-structure was that since the Romans, imported
animals (peacock, guinea-fowl, etc.) have appeared in the animal husbandry
of villas, royal residences, etc.
   The problems discussed in this paper are only a small sample of the
questions which arise in connection with domestication and early animal
breeding. Some of them have been touched upon also in other papers, but I
think it has been useful to raise them in this way because I am convinced that
approaching these questions from different angles can help to solve them.
        Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication        229




Notes
 1 Unfortunately animal representations and objects connected with animal
   husbandry (e.g. bridles) appear quite late in the archaeological record.
 2 Arcikhowski, A. W. (1947). Introduction to Archaeology. (In Russian.)
   Moscow.
 3 Perkins, D. (1964). Prehistoric fauna from Shanidar, Iraq, Science, 144,
   pp. 1565-6.
 4 Coon, C. S. (1951). Cave Explorations in Iran, 1949. Philadelphia.
 5 Hopkins, J. (1967). Identification of the domestication of animals without
   morphological changes. Manuscript, Chicago.
 6 Hopkins, J. (1957). ibid.
 7 Arcikhowski, A. W. (1947). ibid.
 8 Bokonyi, S. (1968). The Historical Development of Animal Breeding in
   Central and Eastern Europe. (In Hungarian with English summary.)
   Agrartort, Szemle.
 9 Szalay, B. (n.d.). The Hungarian aurochs. The history of the aurochs
   (Bosprimigenius Boj.) in Hungary. (In Hungarian.) Manuscript.
10 Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn und das
   Problem der Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung., 14, pp.
   I75-2I4-
11 Boessneck, J., Jequier, P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschi-
   see-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3). Bern.
12 Bokonyi, S. (1959). Die fruhalluviale Wirbeltierfauna Ungarms. (Vom
   Neolithikum bis zur La Tene-Zeit), Acta Arch. Hung., 2, pp. 39-102.
13 Boessneck, J., Jequier, P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). ibid.
14 Pohlhausen, H. (1953). Nachweisbare Ansatze zum Wanderhirtentum
   in der niederdeutschen Mittelsteinzeit, Z. f. Ethnol., 78, pp. 64-82.
   Begleiten.
15 Boessneck, J. (1962). Die Tierreste aus der Argissa-Magula vom prakera-
   mischen Neolithikum bis zur mittleren Bronzezeit. Die deutschen Aus-
   grabungen auf der Argissa-Magula in Thessalien. Bonn.
16 Higgs, E. S. (1962). The fauna of the early neolithic site at Nea Nikomedeia
   Greek Macedonia, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 28, pp. 271-4.
      RAYMOND E. CHAPLIN

       The use of non-morphological criteria in the study of
      animal domestication from bones found on archaeo¬
      logical sites

 The study of the history of man’s exploitation of animals is severely hampered
 by our lack of knowledge concerning the biology of the species involved and
 the dearth of adequately documented specimens from archaeological excava¬
 tions.
. Many studies concerned with the recognition of animal domestication from
 bones have relied on morphological criteria. This is not surprising since the
 problem has generally been approached from an anatomical standpoint.
 These criteria are however of limited value when studying the sequence
 leading to, and the consequences of, domestication.
    The morphological approach presupposes that changes produced by
 domestication will be reflected in the skeleton. In practice it would appear
 that only a few bones of the body may be so affected. Morphological changes
 which may be observed are not necessarily a result of domestication and it is
therefore desirable that contemporary examples of wild species from the
 same region should be available to ascertain whether other factors may be
involved. These points have generally been ignored by archaeologists despite
the clear evidence of rapid changes in the size of wild species in the post¬
glacial period1. Until contemporary deposits of true wild animals have been
found and studied (as opposed to those bones found on excavations and
identified as wild) the interpretation of changes observed in the bones, as
being the result of domestication, can be no more than speculation. It is of
course also necessary to demonstrate that such changes are not part of the
normal variation within the population associated with sex and age or due to
the simultaneous exploitation of different populations. Problems like these
can only be satisfactorily worked out on a few types of bone which usually
form but a small proportion of a large quantity of fragments. As a result of
this, the study of domestication on many sites had had to be done with
samples that were totally inadequate for the problems involved. These
cautions emphasize once again both the need for anatomical and ecological
investigations of living populations to provide objective data on relevant
9—DOPAA   *   *
232   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CHAPLIN

species and the need for the excavation of palaeozoological deposits rather
than just cultural ones2.
    Even where sample size requirements are met, morphological criteria only
permit the recognition of a late stage in the domestication story. The earliest
stage recognizable is that where changes have been produced and this is at an
unknown distance in time or space from the initial success. The answers to
such questions as when and how domestication occurred can only come from
a study of earlier material in the stratigraphical sequence using other criteria.
    Another aspect of the problem of morphological criteria is concerned with
the sequence of domestication. If the changes being studied are the product
of say twenty-five generations, the length of time involved will vary between
species. The time required to produce a given number of generations is a
product of the time from birth to puberty plus the gestation period of
the next offspring. In roe deer, for example, the generation time is 14
months (birth to puberty) plus 10 months (gestation), the first offspring
being produced 24 months after the birth of the parent. In red deer
this is 36 or 48 months, depending on puberty3. Another vital factor in
this, for example, is the degree of selection pressure that was being
exerted; pigs, for example, still strongly resembled their wild ancestors in
Europe long after specialized strains of sheep, cattle and horses had been
developed. This is of course a gross oversimplification of the problem since
it is unwise to make interspecific comparisons of such variable phenomena. It
does however serve to underline the fact that our view of the sequence may
be distorted by the use of morphological criteria.
    If we are to study the events leading to domestication and its significance to
the community, a method of recognizing domestication4 and of quantifying
all animal exploitation is necessary. Domestication is only a pattern of animal
exploitation and can therefore be recognized by reference to the parameters
which define that pattern. In studying domestication it is also necessary to
consider certain specialized usage patterns which, whilst they may not consti¬
tute domestication, may usefully be termed incipient domestication.
    For ungulates in particular, the following parameters may be used to
characterize the nature and scale of the exploitation.

1 The species involved
2 The minimum number of each species
3 The age of these animals
4 The sex of these animals
5 The frequency of the different bones of each species
6 The size of the animals.

   In the methodology outlined below the species involved, the number of
animals and their age and sex are essential parameters. At this point I would
like to make some general observations on the use of these parameters and
also to comment on the other two as they are relevant to much of what is
          The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication               233

discussed in this volume, but they do not receive detailed consideration
below5.
   The frequency of occurrence of the different bones greatly assists in the
identification of the type of site involved (e.g. a field butchering camp) and
the recognition of “trade”. The value of this technique for the investigation
of hunting practices is shown by the work on North American palaeo-Indian
sites6. This has also been used in the study of a Saxon farm site in London7
where it showed that the most valuable joints of mutton had disappeared
from the site. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 and relevant details are given below8.




Fig 1 The minimum number of animals identified from the principal bones
     of the body of the sheep found on a Saxon site, Whitehall, London.
     (This sketch, by Mr. John Atkinson, approximates the type of female sheep from the site)



   Although this method is useful for understanding hunting practices and for
illustrating marketing or the disposal of meat, it does not provide a basis for
the recognition of domestication. The size of the animal will normally deter¬
mine whether it is butchered on the spot instead of the whole carcase being
brought back to the dwelling site intact. Even where there is a temporal shift
in the bone frequency spectrum from field dressing to site dressing, this
may mean no more than a change in hunting area, technique or cultural
practices.
   The minimum number of animals is now the generally accepted basis for all
quantity studies, it having been amply demonstrated on many occasions how
misleading are the results of studies using the fragments method.
   The minimum number of animals may either be used alone or as a basis for
further calculation depending on what aspects of species “importance” are
being studied. Archaeologists commonly refer to the importance of a species
without specifying what the animals were important for. Some common
234   Part H Domestication and exploitation of animals       chaplin

measures of importance, meaningful in the archaeological context are the
number of animals in relation to accommodation, fodder, mobility, etc., the
amount of food produced (not only meat, but milk, blood, visceral organs,
etc.9) and the provision of raw materials. The quantities involved are obtained
by extrapolation from the minimum number, taking into account the age, sex
and size of the animals involved. We should remember that in the most
simple terms at least a hundred sheep may only be the body weight food
equivalent of ten bovines. In terms of resources (food + raw material +
work) one species may be of overwhelming importance though its numbers
are few. In other cases an animal that contributes little in terms of total food
may be of critical importance in the overall food strategy, by providing a food
resource at the most critical period. A likely animal in this respect is the pig.

We should not forget the very important permissive role of certain species.
The capacity of animals to replace human effort or to permit innovation is of
tremendous importance in changing the subsistence and commercial strategy
of man. The effect of the horse on the Indian hunters of the Great Plains of
the U.S.A. is one example of this. More important to our discussion of
agricultural evolution is the contribution of the bovine as a work animal in
both tillage and transport. The bovine harnessed to the plough permitted a
much greater area to be cultivated without population increase which would
have cancelled the benefits of extended tillage. It thus permitted the expan¬
sion of arable cultivation and the marketing of the increased production over a
much wider area. The existence of a marketable surplus was thus able to
nurture the development of non-subsistence economies. The occurrence of
domesticated bovines has a far greater significance than just a shift from
hunting to keeping. We should bear in mind the exceptional importance of
this enabling factor even if, through lack of evidence of its action, we cannot
prove and quantify it in the same way as we do the basic animal production.
   In many human groups when we think of the animals we must consider
that food may have been the predominant need supplied by them. In such
cases it is clearly useless to talk in terms of importance by reference to the
number of head walking around. What is important is the total contribution
of this species to the diet. Again, in relation to agriculture, it is misleading to
talk in terms of shifts in species importance without reference to the exploita¬
tion being practised. If, for example, there is a numerical increase of sheep
whilst cattie numbers stay static, this may have arisen as a result of the
inception or extension of wool production rather than as a result of the
extension of overall meat production. This is more likely to have been
achieved by an extension of cattle numbers if this species could supply it
efficiently within the strategy of production. Here we must bear in mind the
relative difficulties of extending and stabilizing meat production. The small
species with their different breeding biology and development patterns may
be more efficient in producing short term increases and needs, though this
          The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication      235

strategy raises other problems in relation to the suitability of the habitat and
the need for supervision, etc.
    This type of interpretation of the bone evidence is just that—interpre¬
tation—it represents one person’s view of the evidence. Generally it repre¬
sents the best fit to our prejudices. It is therefore disturbing to find a trend in
some recent literature towards the presentation of little more than the
author’s interpretation and lacking the fundamental evidence which would
enable others to assess the data in the light of their theories.
    In a herd of animals, various age and sex structures will optimize the
production of such commodities such as meat, milk, fleece, etc. In the case of
sheep optimum all-commodity production is likely to be achieved by a herd
consisting almost entirely of females and castrates, which are kept until they
are worn out and unlikely to survive another winter. Males, because of their
greater size, yield more meat and wool than a castrate but they may well be
disruptive to the herd. A more efficient use of the herd may however be to
keep only the females for the bulk of the wool (plus breeding, milk and
residual meat) and to remove castrated animals when they reach an economic
carcase weight (having of course also collected the wool clip). Any exploita¬
tion for the basic animal product on a rational basis gives rise to specific age
and sex structures in the population. Population models according to the
basic parameters can be built up for any type of exploitation or survival
strategy. Such models are valuable tools in interpreting the economy behind
the bone assemblage. The exploitation patterns quoted here are the result of
work on Roman and later sites. In quoting them I do not wish to imply that
such patterns will be found on the earliest domestication sites but merely to
demonstrate the strength of these methods in an archaeological context.
   As in the domesticated animals the nature of the parameters for wild
species will be characteristic for particular situations. The population age
structure of a wild herd of deer, for example, is a property of that species and
its habitat, and man’s activity10. Fig. 2 illustrates the age and sex structure of a
wild herd of roe deer in Denmark described by Anderson11, details of which
are given below12. If environmental evidence is available a prediction of this
can be made within certain limits. This will greatly assist in understanding
incipient domestication and the level of exploitation involved. As domestica¬
tion is a movement away from the wild and a transference of both stock and
ideas from one environment to another, the way in which man was exploiting
the wild animals will strongly influence his approach to the problems of
utilization in captivity.
   Man’s exploitation of a wild population is governed by his needs, his
technical skill, his hunting skill and the biology and behaviour of the animal
population.

If we assume, as I think we must, a close knowledge of the territory and
species therein, it is probable that hunting skill is largely static. In the absence
236   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CHAPLIN




Fig 2 The age and sex structure of a herd of wild roe deer (Capreolus
      capreolus L) at Kalo, Denmark, based on the extermination of the herd.



of evidence for the introduction of superior weapons we may reasonably
assume that this factor is also constant. In any case, improved weapons, etc.,
mostly affect the quantity and more rarely the nature of what is killed.
   Thus our two major variables are man’s needs (modified by religious needs
where necessary) and the biology of the animal population. We are thus able
to construct models of animal populations to show which animals are likely to
be killed and to formulate certain hypotheses which will assist in assessing the
exploitation.
   Any sample of bones derived from a human occupation site does of course
reflect some degree of human need. Certain needs and their consequences
are however of particular relevance to domestication.
   The amount of time and effort needed to capture an animal is not propor¬
tional to its size; thus in the quest for food man tends to exert a choice for the
          The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication   237

largest ungulates available that are consistent with his needs, abilities and
efforts. Depending on relative abundance however the same quantity of meat
may be more easily obtained from several animals of a smaller species.
Further, some species can survive much higher cropping rates than others.
Animals with long pre-pubertal periods such as the elephants contrast sharply
with the medium sized ungulates in this respect. Given hunting aids such as
dogs, the emphasis in hunting may be shifted to those species that are
amenable to herding by dogs such as reindeer, saiga, sheep and goats, etc.,
away from cattle, pigs and deer, which are not so amenable to hunting in this
way. A desire for a particular raw material such as wool or antler may also
influence hunting and it would be of value to know the extent to which this
affected the ecology of the region. Preferential culling of male animals in a
polygamous species such as red deer or sheep is beneficial to the population
since it increases the reproduction rate13, a fact which would not go un¬
noticed. Thus, whether deliberate or not (a fact which we can never know)
such a beneficial exploitation should perhaps be regarded as incipient
domestication. Such patterns are identifiable in bone samples by reference to
the parameters given.
   If selective hunting is not practised the cull should be random in regard to
the numbers of animals in any age and sex group. We may therefore predict
for a given species the likely proportions of each age and sex group when no
selection is practised. Adjustment must be made for differences in behaviour
and biology between the sexes. From the sort of data that is given in Fig. 2 it
is possible to estimate the frequency with which a sex or age group is likely to
be encountered. This can then be modified in the fight of behaviour patterns
such as that of the red deer herd which is usually led by an old hind.
Being the leader, the old hind is the one most likely to be caught by capture
devices set on lines of movement.
   In some cervids a selection bias for anders may be recognized by com¬
parison of the age structure of the males with that of the females. Since the
female shows no obvious external indication of her age the female sample
should reflect the random picture. The age structure of a sample of male
fallow deer killed in road accidents in Epping Forest14, is shown in Fig. 3
this may be compared with the age structure of a sample of male fallow deer
obtained by purposeful culling in a park herd shown in Fig. 4. These patterns
require detailed study of the individuals and populations in order to explain
them. The park herd is only explicable in terms of the purpose of the cull and
the ability of the stalker to identify the relevant criteria in living animals15.
   Careful consideration must be given to the age structure and seasonal
distribution of the males and female16. In polygamous species this can vary
considerably between the sexes. The mortality rate often varies considerably
and this is not so much occasioned by the direct effects of fighting males but
the aftermath. During the rutting season males lose condition as a result of
 which many fail to survive the spring. In some species there is a marked
238   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   CHAPLIN




                                                          paillH jaquinN




                                                                                1
                                                                                S       “
                                                                                        <u
                                                                                Q       *->
                                                                                        o
                                                                                 a a>
                                                                                 w .3
                                                                                ^ a,
                                                                                 j> O-t
                                                                                 I w
                                                                                rG c
                                                                                m-i     un

                                                                                 <U     £
                                                                                T3 J
                                                                                 3 ^
                                                                                -a 05
                                                                                F-H
                                                                                    y

                                                                                 o e
                                                                                 U      c3
                                                                                 bo
                                                                                 a3    -t-j

                                                                                 (U     <L>
                                                                                .G GG
                                                                           QJ
                                                                           CD   H 3
                                                                           c
                                                                                .b-0
                                                  pan.ivj jaqiunN               s;
         The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication    239

seasonal separation of the sexes for much of the year. It must be borne in
mind however that often the young (pre-pubertal) males form part of the
female herd17.
    In conclusion we can say that in assessing the nature of the exploitation of
a wild species by man the most important parameters are the age and sex of
the animals in the sample, the structure of which must be explained against
the biology and behaviour of the species.
    Despite exerting a fairly strong influence on the wildlife population
prehistoric man is unlikely to have created any strong imbalance or brought
many species near extinction. However, where man had concentrated on a
particular species, either as a result of environmental or ecological factors or
the use of canids for hunting, some form of wildlife management (incipient
domestication) was being exerted. In the case of animals like the reindeer it
is an almost invisible step to full domestication.
    It is not known whether sedentary domestication was generally preceded
by a phase of semi-nomadic domestication. We must be careful not to over¬
 generalize about such events for the history of domestication of each species
 was probably different amongst different groups and in different environ¬
 ments. It is possible that semi-nomadic domestication is the result of the
 evolution of hunting techniques with specialization as a result of the adoption
 of the dog. We may on this basis suggest why man was able, in certain areas,
 to have reached a stage of semi-nomadic/nomadic herding of reindeer, sheep
 and goats, and possibly gazelles. This is however a blind alley of cultural
 evolution and there is as yet little evidence that this is a significant general
 stage of the transition from hunting to domestication.
     An alternative view of the domestication of the sheep and goat lies in their
 relationship to cultivation. The full potential of tillage to the community is
 only realized when this is sedentary though it does not preclude seasonal
 hunting (which can be identified from the bones). The effect of tillage is to
 insert into the environment patches of concentrated luxuriance which few
 herbivores can resist. Thus, with the adoption of tillage the species valued for
 hunting become the enemies of the cultivator. The necessity of crop pro¬
  tection, however, must have been a welcome innovation for the animals came
  into the fields and no longer had to be pursued! To be a successful cultivator
  however one had to virtually exterminate the game, and meat and raw
  materials would become scarce locally. It is perhaps at this stage that the most
  valuable species were brought into captivity. Some support for this view is
  obtained by a consideration of which species were the most usable and which
  were actually chosen in this early period.
     In South-west Asia there would seem to be three contenders—pigs, goats
  and sheep. The pig would seem to be the least amenable of the three because
  of its weak social structure. Sheep and goats are relatively small and can be
  handled by one man, they breed regularly and have a short generation period.
  These qualities are also shared by the pig. Sheep and goat are social species,
240   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CHAPLIN


handleable with the aid of canids, this contrasts with the remainder of the
fauna—cattle, pigs, deer, etc., where this is more weakly developed.
   The herding of reindeer in the north is a logical extension of their hunting
in a zone which does not favour tillage and to which domestic species are ill
adapted. In other geographical zones away from South-west Asia, other
species might have been more attractive. The choice however may not always
have had to be made since in Europe, by the time tillage had spread to any
extent, it was already accompanied by successfully domesticated ungulates,
both large and small. It thus appears that in Europe and South-west Asia it is
just those animals that we would expect to be most suitable that are the earliest
domesticated ungulates on present evidence. We do, however, need to know
much more about animal exploitation and its relationship to settlement and
cultivation in pre-domestication times by methods outiined above.
    The hypothesis involving tillage implies that full domestication is an
immediate step and that from the outset man must exert his control by
containment and in ensuring that food is available and that the environment
will enable them to breed and flourish. Inherent in this new relationship are
two potentially disruptive factors, one, the problem of the sex ratio of the
offspring and the disruptive effect of sexually mature males, the second, the
need for a take-off from the population for food. There are two ways of
dealing with the problem of the male. Either the removal of the majority of
males before puberty or their castration. The optimum production from the
herd is obtained by the latter method though there is possibly little difference
between killing intact males when they reach optimum pre-pubertal con¬
dition and the killing of castrates when they reach optimum condition. The
overall management of the herd for meat and fleece production in the case of
sheep consists of the keeping of the females into old age which are killed
when they are unlikely to survive the lean period. This provides annual crops
of wool and lambs, and also residual meat. The males, either as castrates or
intact animals are killed for meat as described above since they are of less
value than females and reach optimum value at a particular weight and time.
 We must, I think, give credit to these early farmers/herders for the rational
use of their flock and I think the pattern outlined above is not beyond their
 ability. This type of system is clearly recognizable archaeologically since there
 is a considerable disparity between the components of the relevant para¬
 meters between the wild and domesticated systems of exploitation. These
 utilization patterns are well demonstrated at the Saxon farm in Whitehall,
 London. Provisional age structure data of unsexed bones is shown in Figs.
 5-7 for cattle, pigs and sheep. Despite the slight inconsistencies18 in the data
 occasioned by the methods used, clear differences in the strategy are apparent
 between the species. These differences are readily explained on the lines noted
 above.
    The sex and age structures of this domesticated system are quite distinct.
 The majority of the animals fall into two groups, one, predominantly of male
              The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication   241

     100




     20
■S
C3




           Age range




Fig 5 Saxon farm, Whitehall, London. Age at death of domestic pigs as
           shown by the fusion of the epiphyses of long bones. Above, percentage
           of animals aged less than x months. Below, percentage killed in age
           range.

and castrates, are killed quite young, and another group, predominantly of
females, are killed in old age. One of the critical points to be noted is that a
trimodal sex structure will be present but it must be remembered that the
intact male is likely to be represented only by about two to four animals per
hundred. Adequate samples are therefore large. Limits to the recognition of
sex are set by bones whose growth is not yet completed. These immature
bones have not as far as I am aware been investigated for sexual differences.
   There are enormous difficulties surrounding any attempt to age animals
242         Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   chaplin




      80-




v>
O)
-20H
a>
cn
co



                   18 months
            Age range -months
     100'




     40


     ,20-


                   0-18 months
            Age range-months


Fig 6 Saxon farm, Whitehall, London. Age at death of domestic cattle as
            shown by the fusion of the epiphyses of long bones. Above, percentage
            of animals aged less than x months. Below, percentage killed in age
            range.


absolutely. This however does not invalidate the method since we are only
concerned with the relative age and sex structure of the population and this
can be obtained from either dental criteria19 or the use of the sequence of
fusion of the epiphyses of long bones20. Depicted graphically this latter is
shown as the number above or below the age. Much work has now been done
on sexual dimorphism in bones and it should not be difficult to interpret the
distribution patterns of measurements and ratios obtained from the sample.
   It has been seen that the exploitation of domestic and of wild populations
is characterized by particular features of the age and sex classes within the
population which are sufficiently different to be detectable in groups of sub¬
fossil bone. Further parameters given above enable both a description and a
         The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication   243

         100




        s 20




                   Age range-months
            100



            80-




            40 -


        ^20-1




                   Age range - months


Fig 7 Saxon farm, Whitehall, London. Age at death of domestic sheep as
     shown by the fusion of the epiphyses of the long bones. Above, per¬
     centage of animals aged less than * months. Below, percentage killed in
     age range.


quantification of the exploitation of animals by man to be made. It is suggested
that this approach is particularly necessary when seeking to study the man/
animal relationship and therefore also to the study of the origins and history
of domestication in particular.
244   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals          CHAPLIN



      Notes
       1 Kurten, B. (1959). Rates of Evolution in Fossil Mammals. Cold Spring
         Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. 24; Genetics and Twentieth
         Century Darwinism, 205.
       2 Chaplin, R. E. (1965). Animals in Archaeology, Antiquity, 39, p. 204;
         Berry, R. J., this volume, p. 207-17.
       3 Chaplin, R. E. (1966). Reproduction in British Deer. Passmore Edwards
         Museum, London.
       4 It is perhaps worth bearing in mind at this stage that the biological
         definition of domestication that is generally accepted and which is used
         in this book does not provide a single criteria for its objective recognition
         on archaeological sites until a very late period.
       5 I am preparing a fuller study on the recording and use of such parameters.
       6 White, T. E. (1952-5). Observations on the butchering technique of some
         aboriginal peoples. 1952—American Antiquity, 17, p. 337. 1953—
         American Antiquity, 19, p. 160. 1954—American Antiquity, 194, p. 254.
         1955—American Antiquity, 21, p. 170. White, T. E. (1953). Studying
         osteological material. Plains Archaeological Conference Newsletter, 6,1953;
         Guilday, J., Parmalee, P. and Tanner, D. (1962). Aboriginal butchering
         techniques at the Eschelman site (36 La 12), Lancaster County, Penn¬
         sylvania, Pennsylvania Archaeologist, 32, 2: p. 59.
       7 Chaplin, R. E. in preparation. The animal bones from a Saxon farm in
         Whitehall, London. A collection of animal bones from pits of the ninth
         century a.d. is being studied.
       8 The discrepancy between the number of animals identified from bones
         that would have had little meat on them and those that had the most is inter¬
         preted as indicating the “export” of dressed carcases or joints from this
         site. This analysis for practical reasons is limited to cranial, girdle and
         limb bones.
       9 Cranstone, B. A. L., this volume, p. 247-63.
      10 Lack, D. (1954). The Natural regulation of Animal Numbers. Oxford.
      11 Anderson, J. (1953). Analysis of a Danish roe-deer population. Danish
         Rev. of Game Biology, 2, p. 127.
      12 The data redrawn from Anderson, J. (1953). ibid, is based on the total
         extermination of a wild herd of Roe deer. A great deal of very important
         information is contained in this paper which should be consulted in full.
         The data given here should not be used without reference to the original
         work.
      13 Anderson, J. (1953). ibid.
      14 Chaplin, R. and Chapman, D. (1963). A preliminary report on some fallow
         deer (Dama dama) from Epping Forest, Essex Naturalist, 31 (1), p. 148;
         Chaplin, R. and Chapman, D. (1966). Report on fallow deer (Dama dama L)
         obtained from Epping Forest during May-December 1964, J. of Zoology,
         148, p. 561.
      15 Chaplin, R., and White, R. (1969). The use of tooth eruption and wear,
         body weight and antler characteristics in the age estimation of wild and
         park male fallow deer (Dama dama),J. of Zoology, 157, p. 125.
      16 Grubb, P. and Jewell, P. A. (1966). Social grouping and home range in feral
         soay sheep, in Jewell, P. A. and Loizos, C. (eds.) Play, Exploration and Terri¬
         tory in Mammals, Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, Number
         18, London; Lowe, V. P. W. (1966). Observation on the dispersal of red
         deer on Rhum, in Jewell, P. A. and Loizos, C. ibid.; Darling, F. Fraser
         (I937)* A Herd of Red Deer, Oxford.
      17 Grubb, P. and Jewell, P. A. (1966). ibid.
    The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication       245

18 In detail almost any of this type of graph can be misleading because of the
   present limits of our knowledge and techniques for age estimation. The
   present graphs Figs. 5-7 are based on the fusion of the epiphyses of the
   long bones. The data depicted here is based on the percentage of a particu¬
   lar bone type that is or is not fused. The sequence in which the epiphyses
   fuse is generally accepted as a constant but the true age at which they fuse
   is extremely variable. This is discussed more fully in Chaplin, in prepara¬
   tion and Silver, I. (1963). The ageing of domestic animals, in Brothwell,
   D. R. and Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London. The ages
   given on the lower axis of the graph are in general the upper limits of the
   range of variation in modern stock quoted by Silver, I. (1963). ibid. In
   Fig. 6 no attempt has been made to remove the minor inconsistencies in
   the centre. This is due to the fairly small sample of relevant criteria in
   that range. Notwithstanding these cautions these graphs give a reliable
   indication of the general structure of the husbandry on this site.
19 Chaplin, R. E., in preparation; Chaplin, R. and White, R. (1969). ibid.
20 Silver, I. (1963). ibid.
      B. A. L. CRANSTONE

      Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography


I must begin by defining my brief. My main concern is with the types of
economies in which livestock play a part; with the connection (sometimes the
contradiction) between the economic value of an animal and the prestige
which it enjoys or confers; with the efficiency (or lack of it) with which the
economic possibilities of animals are exploited; with the techniques used by
man in handling animals and in obtaining from them what he desires. I am
dealing mainly with animals as providers of food or raw materials, not with
draught or pack animals, or with animals as sources of power. I shall hardly
enter the very wide fields of the effects of stock-keeping on social and political
institutions and on the way of life of peoples who depend largely on their
livestock, or of the restrictive effect this way of life may have on their material
culture.



       The place of animals in some representative societies

Most people who practise some form of agriculture keep domestic animals
which provide food, raw materials, or power: that is to say, which are not
merely pets, or aids in hunting, but are valued for their meat, milk, blood,
hides, wool or other products, or for their ability to pull or carry. Among
peoples who practise shifting cultivation and who lack the plough the number
of animals kept and their economic importance tend to be relatively small, for
the level of agricultural technique is not sufficiently high to produce a surplus
of food to support them. It is true that the animals often forage for themselves,
as in the case of the mithan2 of Assam or the Melanesian pig, but they usually
return at night or at least at intervals to be fed. In these conditions domestic
and wild or feral animals often inter-breed, and in appearance may be in¬
distinguishable. Indeed the Nagas of Assam encourage this interbreeding to
improve the stock, and supply salt-licks in the forest in order to attract the
wild bulls, the domesticated females being driven out to them3. Since few
animals can be kept there is little or no deliberate use of manure on the fields.
248   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


though cattle may graze on stubbles after harvest. Many peoples at this
agricultural level do not understand the value of manure.
  Among plough cultivators the situation is rather different. The use of the
plough implies the use of draught animals. Among plough cultivators grain
crops are usually the staple, which means that there are stubbles, or straw, or
by-products on which cattle can be fed, and improved techniques may
provide a surplus to human requirements which can be fed to animals.
Animals tend to be kept under closer control, because the land suitable for
cultivation is likely to be fully and permanently utilized, and so there is less
scope for animals to forage and more need to ensure that they do not damage
crops, fences or terraces. Under these conditions of closer confinement
opportunities for interbreeding with wild animals will be much less frequent.
Moreover the greater density of settlement may result in wild animals of the
same species being exterminated in the locality. It then becomes more likely
that selective breeding will take place4.
  The animals which provide manure may not be in the same ownership as
the stubbles on which they feed. The cattle-keeping Fulani of the savannah
zone between the southern borders of the Sahara and the forest provide an
example of a symbiotic relationship with the settled agriculturalists. They
migrate southwards in the dry season in search of pasture and water, and
northwards in the wet season to avoid tsetse fly. Except on the edge of the
desert they depend largely on the sedentary peoples, pasturing their cattle
on the stubbles or corraling them on the fallows, making gifts to the culti¬
vators before entering their territory, and obtaining vegetable foods in
exchange for milk products5.
  Animals are often of great importance to settled agricultural peoples not
only for draught purposes but also to provide power for water-raising or
milling machinery. But their direct contribution to the food supply may be
rather small, though important in a protein-deficient diet.
  Many shifting cultivators value their domestic animals as much for ritual
as for purely economic reasons. This is true of the Nagas of Assam and their
mithan6, and in many parts of Melanesia pigs are regarded in this light: some
tribes of the New Guinea highlands kill hundreds at periodical ceremonies.
  The New Hebrides provide some good examples. Layard7 describes the
role of pigs in Vao, a small island off the east coast of Malekula. The upper
canines of boars are knocked out so that the tusks of the lower jaw grow round
in a circle, pierce the flesh of the cheek and re-enter the jaw. In some cases
they re-emerge to form a second complete circle or even more. It is not
surprising that the physical condition of these boars is usually poor.
“Circle-tuskers” are essential for sacrifice and ceremonial presentation. The
only pig-meat eaten is that of sacrifices. So some boars are gelded and
sacrificed before the tusks re-enter the jaw; their value is much less, but they
provide more meat. For this reason pigs are often killed in pairs, a circle-
tusker and a gelding. The circle-tusker is of value only while alive, and only if
                        Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       249

its tusks are in good condition; if a tusk is broken the pig is worth little. Its
physical condition does not affect its value, but after death its tusks are
worthless.
   It often happens that a man does not possess suitably tusked boars when
he requires them, and it is necessary to borrow. The boar must be repaid
later with a boar with tusks of the stage of development which those of the
borrowed boar would by then have reached. This may entail borrowing again.
Tusked boars thus become almost a form of currency, and a complex network
of obligation comes into being. It appears too that the importance of pigs is
such that land which might be used for cultivation is left to provide foraging
ground for them.
   Sows are not eaten by either sex. Women may not, because pigs are killed
only in the context of ritual in which women have no part. Men may not,
because sows being female are ritually dangerous to them. Layard says of the
cultivation of tusks: “This practice lies at the base of the natives’ whole overt
religious life, gives rise to the chief form of currency, and so largely regulates
all their economic activities, and . . . permeates every aspect of life”8.
   The Sakau district of north-west Espiritu Santo, as described by J. R.
• Baker9, presents a somewhat different picture. Here there is the remarkably
high proportion of about ten to twenty hermaphrodite pigs per hundred
males. The degree, or form, of their intersexuality varies. Four forms are
distinguished and named. All are sterile, but grow tusks. Apparently the
natives have to operate on piglets of one form to allow them to pass urine—an
interesting example of veterinary technique. A man purchasing promotion in
rank (on which political and social power depend) must kill both tusked boars
and hermaphrodites, and they are required also for presentation, for example
in obtaining a wife. As in Vao pigs are borrowed. Since boars and hermaphro¬
dites only are of value many female piglets are killed instead of being kept for
breeding, as would seem logical to us. Here women and children may eat the
flesh of hermaphrodites.
   Among pastoral peoples the picture is somewhat different. Full pastoral
nomadism is an Old World way of life practised in areas in which either
insufficient rainfall or a short summer growing season makes agriculture
impossible or unattractive. Pastoral nomads are economically dependent on
their animals, and they cannot, therefore, totally ignore economic considera¬
tions in relation to them. This dependence forces them, or a section of the
group, to lead a nomadic life in search of pasture and water, but it is not
always necessary for the whole group to move. Among the Lapps the old
people, women and children live relatively settled lives while the younger
 men tend the herds (this is to some extent a recent development), and the
 camels of the Ahaggar Tuareg may be at pasture in the Sudan five hundred
 miles from the oases where the flocks of goats and sheep are based and the
 slaves tend the gardens10.
    The animal which has the greatest economic value for a pastoral people is
250   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


often not that which has the greatest prestige. The Tuareg keep camels,
goats and sheep, a few horses, and in the south a few cattle and donkeys. The
camel is the prestige animal, a subject (with war and love) for poetry. Formerly
the Tuareg lived partly by raiding and by exactions from caravans, and for
these activities camels were essential, as they still are for trading activities.
But economically goats are much more valuable. There are ten times as many
goats as sheep, the latter being bred mainly for slaughter, and regarded as
more appropriate for sacrifice by this rather superficially Moslem people.
There seem to be about thirty to forty goats per person (perhaps excluding
slaves).
   The Rwala bedouin of the Syrian desert11 keep camels and horses. Here it is
the camel which is economically vital, but the horse which has the prestige.
Horses are used for repelling raids, in the vicinity of the camp; but camels
are ridden for long-distance raiding. Few stallions are kept, mares being
preferred for riding. The horse is unsuited to desert conditions; it has to be
specially fed, and foals receive all the mare’s milk and camel’s milk in addition.
The bedouin are the suppliers of camels to the settled peoples, and the camel
is practically their only saleable product.
   On the steppes of Russian Turkestan the Kazak12 kept horses, sheep, a few
goats, and bactrian camels (their traditional way of life is now largely if not
entirely obsolete). Sheep, of the fat-rumped and fat-tailed breeds, form the
majority of the livestock and provide the main food supply, but the Kazak too
value the horse more highly. However, unlike the Arabs, the Kazak prefer to
ride geldings. Mares are milked, and their flesh is eaten, but both are luxury
foods. Sheep too are milked, and the milk made into butter and cheese. The
climate is unsuitable for cattle, but a few are kept for their milk: beef is
disliked and rarely eaten. Sheep and horses are herded separately, since
horses need better grazing. Sheep provide wool, which is made into felt.
Camels are mainly used as pack animals, but the hair which they shed in the
spring is used in weaving rugs and hangings for the felt-covered tents called
yurt. Sheep are herded by boys, who often ride oxen.
   Among the East African herding peoples it is cattle which have, and confer,
prestige. The Masai13—who are exceptional for this area in that they do not
also cultivate—have nearly as many sheep as cattle, but sheep are far less
highly esteemed. Both sheep and catde provide milk, blood and meat. How¬
ever, the Masai have two types of cattle: a smaller sort with horns of lyre
form, and a larger type with shorter horns. The latter yield nearly twice as
much milk, but the former are more highly valued. Among East African cattle¬
keeping people generally a man’s prestige depends on the size of his herd, not
on the quality of his beasts.
  The Nuer11 of the swamp and savannah country on both sides of the upper
Nile both cultivate and herd cattle. They are pastoral in oudook, and before
the outbreak of rinderpest in the late nineteenth century apparendy relied
more heavily on their catde than they do now. In 1930 there were about ten
                        Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography      251

cattle and five sheep and goats to a byre—that is, to a family unit. Millet and
maize are cultivated, and fishing is important in the dry season and in bad
years. Among the Nuer cattle have undisputed ritual pre-eminence. They play
a part in all social processes and relationships. Fathers provide cows to obtain
wives for their sons, and another son cannot marry until the herd has been
built up again. Men have an intimate knowledge of the peculiarities of their
beasts, and take their names from the ox given by their father at their initia¬
tion. Songs are sung in praise of oxen and girls. Cattle, sheep and goats are
never killed purely for meat; they are sacrificed as a means of making contact
with the spirits. But the pretext may be a thin one, and any animal which dies
goes into the pot, so meat is eaten more commonly than by many herding
peoples.
   An indication of the real importance of a domestic animal can be gained
from the number of specialized terms relating to it. The Tuareg have twelve
or more terms to indicate the age and sex of goats and at least seventeen for
their colour15. The Nuer have six main terms for the shape of the horns of
their cattle; ten main colour terms and at least twelve for combinations of
white and grey; and others denoting age and sex16. The Lapp reindeer herders
—who have no other domestic animal of economic significance—have about
fifty names for colours and the distribution of patches of colour, almost as
many for varieties of antler form, and dozens for age and sex. This has a very
practical application: by using a combination of these terms it is possible to
designate any individual animal among thousands17.



      Variation of efficiency in the exploitation of livestock
The degree of efficiency with which peoples exploit the possibilities offered
by their livestock varies greatly. The Nuer seem to be markedly successful in
this respect. Their staple foods are milk and millet. Cows’ milk is drunk
fresh or eaten with millet porridge. It is also left to sour in gourds, which are
not cleaned so that the acids remain to curdle the milk. It is accumulated,
sometimes for several weeks (in which case ox’s urine is added as a pre¬
servative), and then is boiled to make a yellow cheese which will keep for
months if sealed in a gourd with cattle-dung. The whey is drunk by women
and boys. The milk of sheep and goats is used only by children.
   Blood is obtained from cattle by binding the neck so that a vein becomes
congested, and piercing it with a small knife. Women boil the blood to
thicken it; men let it coagulate and roast pieces in the embers.
   The Nuer depend on their cattle not only for food. Their country lacks
timber, stone and iron. Cattle provide skins, from which bedding, drums,
shields and thongs are made; bones, made into beaters, pounders, scrapers
and other tools; horn from which spoons and spear heads are formed; dung,
used as fuel, for plastering walls and floors, for dressing wounds; the ashes of
252   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


dung are used as a mouth-wash and tooth powder and for dressing the hair
and skin; urine has uses in washing, making cheese and dressing skins.
  The Masai use milk and blood, and make butter but not cheese. They also
use the milk, blood and meat of sheep. Blood is obtained by shooting into
the vein of the neck a special arrow with a stop below the point which pre¬
vents it penetrating too far (Fig. i). There are restrictions on eating meat: it




Fig i Drawing blood from the neck vein of an ox by shooting into it an
      arrow with a stop below the point. Masai.
      (after Hollis, A. C. (1905). The Masai: their language and folklore. Oxford.
      PI. XI.)

must not, for instance, be eaten on a day on which milk is consumed. The
Bantu-speaking peoples of south-east and south Africa do not draw blood, nor
do they make cheese. The Fulani depend heavily on milk, do not use blood,
and eat meat only on ceremonial occasions.
  The Rwala bedouin depend mainly on camel’s milk drunk fresh or sour, or
boiled and made into cheese. Many families when in the desert live solely on
milk for long periods. Meat is rarely eaten. Wheat or sorghum and dates
are obtained from the settled peoples on the desert fringes. Among the
Tuareg only the camel herdsmen depend substantially on camel’s milk. They
make no cheese and little butter. Those living in the oases, however—the
majority—consume a good deal of goat’s milk, which is drunk fresh or sour
and made into butter or hard cheese, the latter being pounded and mixed with
food or water. Little meat is eaten: occasionally a camel foal is killed for a
festival, and barren she-goats or castrated he-goats are killed. Sheep are
bred mainly for slaughter, but are few in number. Millet, dates and figs and
other vegetable foods are available in the oases, and herdsmen sometimes
collect and grind wild grass seeds.
   The Kazak keep mares mainly for their milk, which is made into kumiss.
                        Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       253


  It is poured into a skin bag, a wood paddle is inserted and the neck is closed
  tightly round it. The paddle is agitated for several hours and then the milk is
  left to sour for about four days. The result is a slightly intoxicating and very
  nourishing drink which keeps for a long time. The bags have been known to
  burst, with devastating results. Sheep’s milk, which is much more plentiful, is
  soured or made into butter or cheese. Soft cheese is mashed in water when
  milk is scarce; hard cheese largely replaces meat in winter and spring. The
  older sheep are killed off in the autumn, but at other times meat is a
  luxury.
     Most of the Lapps now regard reindeer as a cash crop, selling the meat
  in the urban markets. The herds are allowed to wander in spring and summer
  and become mixed, and little use is made of their milk. Formerly the method
  was more intensive: the herd was kept separate and under control, and does
  were milked from spring to autumn. This method, though it exploited the
  potentialities of the reindeer more fully, was in some ways less efficient; it
  led to overcropping of the lichens in the more restricted area available to a
  family’s herd, and the spread of disease was more rapid. Moreover it re¬
  quired the co-operation of the whole family, which is no longer possible for
. social reasons.
     It will be clear, then, that pastoral peoples vary greatly in the degree to
  which they exploit their animals. Few are able to eat meat regularly. Most
  depend heavily on milk and milk products. All obtain some vegetable food.
  The peoples mentioned also vary greatly in the bases of their economies. The
  Rwala and the Lapps depend almost entirely on camels and reindeer re¬
  spectively. The Kazak and the Tuareg have several species. The Nuer,
  though they think of themselves as cattle people, also cultivate and fish.
  Sections of many pastoral peoples—often those who have lost their herds
  through disease or other misfortune—live settled lives and trade vegetable
  products with their nomadic relatives.
     The reindeer, the last animal of major economic importance to be domesti¬
  cated, provides examples of varying degrees of domestication18. It is used in
  various ways from Scandinavia to the Bering Strait. In the east of Siberia
  and in America the Yukaghir and the Eskimo did not domesticate it, though
  some depended heavily on the wild herds. The half-wild reindeer of the
  Chukchi roam at will, followed by the herders. They cannot be milked or used
  for riding or for drawing sledges; they provide only meat and skins, and the
  Chukchi depend also on fishing and sealing. The sedentary Yakut and the
  Samoyed use them as pack animals and to draw sledges, but not for milking or
  riding. The Tungus live by a combination of hunting and pastoralism. They
  use reindeer for drawing sledges, as pack animals and for riding (a good buck
  will carry 150 lb. for fifty miles in a day). They milk them, but do not make
  butter or cheese. They rarely kill them for meat. Families with only a few
  reindeer use them to extend the range of their hunting and fishing. The
  Skolt Lapps of Norway and Finland have small herds which they manage by
254   Part H Domestication and exploitation of animals      Cranstone


the more intensive method described above, and rely also on fishing and
hunting. Finally the extensive methods of the mountain Lapps have enabled
them to extend southwards down the previously uninhabited plateaux of
central Scandinavia.
   So far only Old World peoples have been mentioned, for pastoralism is
exclusively an Old World way of life. In America the only domestic animals
directly of interest in the present context are the two South American
 Camelidae, the llama and the alpaca19. The llama is of great importance in the
Andean zone as a pack animal. It is hardy, tolerant of thirst, and suited to
 high altitudes. A strong male will average fifteen to twenty miles a day for
 many days carrying more than ioo lb. (this is only a little more than a good
 dog will pull, in favourable conditions; but the conditions in which the two
 animals are employed are quite different). The llama also provides meat, wool
 and hides, and its dried dung is important as fuel in the largely treeless zone in
 which it is found. It is not ridden or milked. The armies of the Incas seem to
 have been accompanied by herds of llamas to serve as a mobile meat-supply.
 Llamas were apparendy castrated to obtain more tasty meat and longer wool,
 but it seems uncertain whether this was a pre-Columbian practice.
    The alpaca, a smaller species, is kept mainly for its wool, but also for its
 meat, hides and dung.
    The vicuna, a wild species, provides superlative wool. The reason for the
 failure of the Indians to domesticate it seems to be that before mating it goes
 through an elaborate and protracted courtship ritual, which is inhibited by
 captivity. The llama and alpaca have similar but apparendy less elaborate
 mating behaviour. One wonders whether similar difficulties have prevented
 the domestication of other species.



       Animal-management techniques
 We now come to techniques of animal management. These can be divided
 conveniendy into those concerned with controlling breeding, those concerned
 with obtaining milk for human use, and a miscellaneous group.
   There are several reasons for not allowing animals to breed freely and
 promiscuously. In harsh environments young born at certain seasons may
 have a reduced prospect of survival. The Kazak fit leather aprons to their
 rams in the spring, since autumn-born lambs have litde chance. The Masai
 practise the same method. The Tuareg divide their flocks of goats into two
 and arrange for the kids to be bom at two seasons, depending on the expected
 availability of pasture, so as to spread the milk yield over a longer period.
 The prepuces of he-goats and rams which are not to be allowed to breed are
 bound with a cord (Fig. 2)20.
    It seems to be rather unusual for males to be selected for breeding in order
 to pass on valuable characteristics. The Nuer, however, choose bull-calves for
                       Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       255




Fig 2 Prevention of mating. A ram, the prepuce of which has been bound
     with a cord and tied back to its scrotum; its front and back legs have
     been hobbled together with the same object. Tuareg.
     (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg.
     Copenhagen. Fig. 25.)

breeding from the calves of the best milking cows and castrate most of the
remainder, leaving one entire to about thirty or forty cows.
   Castration is the most usual method of controlling breeding. It has the
effect, too, of rendering the animals easier to handle and affects their
metabolism. The Lapps castrate most of the reindeer bucks and use them for
draught and pack purposes and as bell-reindeer which lead the herd. The
Tuareg say that castrated camels grow larger humps and fatten more quickly,
and are more enduring and stronger as riding animals. They are also less
dangerous, since bull-camels in rut sometimes attack people.
   The method of castration in general use among cattle-keeping peoples, and
applied to other animals such as camels and horses, is by opening the scrotum
and removing the testicles. Some African herdsmen use a knife, others the
blade of a spear. In New Guinea pigs are castrated in this way with a bamboo
knife. All too often authors (including professional anthropologists) have
recorded the practice without describing the method.
   A second group of methods involves damaging or destroying the testicles
without removing them. Sometimes the scrotum is bound with a cord
beforehand so that the testicles atrophy. The Lapps wrap the scrotum in
cloth and bite or chew it; the result is often a partial castration which however
renders the animal docile and more easily tamed21. The Sonjo of Tanzania
are irrigation agriculturalists who also keep flocks of goats. They castrate all
males at about six months, the only exceptions being those—apparently fairly
numerous—whose testicles do not descend. The method is to strangulate the
scrotum with a bow-string, and then to crush the testicles with an elongated
stone implement especially shaped and smoothed for the purpose22. The
Masai castrate rams by pounding the testicles between two stones.
256   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


   It is unusual to find the ability of females to breed controlled or destroyed.
However, some Tuareg insert a small pebble into the uterus of she-camels
with this object; a practice which seems to be confined to those who prefer
she-camels for riding because of their smoother gait23.
   The development of techniques for obtaining milk is rendered necessary
by the “milk-ejection reflex”. This has been described by Amoroso and
Jewell24; it seems to be a true reflex activated by the release of a hormone.
Stimulating highly-domesticated dairy cattle to “let down their milk” is
less difficult than in the case of the animals usually milked by less advanced
peoples.
   Usually the presence of the young animal is necessary to start the flow
of milk. The Nuer, the Basuto25 and other south African peoples26, and the
Tuareg all allow the calf to suck first; the animal is then milked, after which
the calf is allowed to return to the udder. Difficulty arises if a calf dies, or
is killed for eating or to conserve milk for human use. Many peoples then
skin the calf, stuff the skin with straw or grass and bring it to the mother.
The Nuer rub the dummy with the mother’s urine to give it the “right”
smell. The Rwala sometimes kill a camel calf at birth, smear another with its
blood and bring it to the she-camel; or if a strange calf is to be suckled they
tie up the mother’s nostrils so that she cannot smell it. I have seen a reference
to a method practised in the north of England, where the skin of a dead calf
was mounted on a rocker so that it would butt against the udder in a realistic
manner.




Fig 3 Weaning. A ring armed with thorns which is tied round the calf’s
      muzzle. Nuer.
      (after Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1940). The Nuer. Oxford. Fig. 6.)


  Sometimes the calf is allowed all the mother’s milk for a period after birth.
This may be especially necessary if pasture is poor.
  Another method of activating the milk-ejection reflex is by stimulation of
the genital tract, either manually or by inflating the vagina with air. At the
present time these practices are especially typical (or have been most fre¬
quently recorded) of the cattle-keeping peoples of north-east and east
Africa, but they have been observed in Asia and Europe and are of great
antiquity. They have been described by Lagercrantz27 and by Amoroso and
Jewell.
  In order to conserve milk for human use it may be necessary to accelerate
                         Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       257




Fig 4 Animal-management techniques of the Gonds of Madhya Pradesh.
      Heavy wood neck-ring, to accustom the beast to a yoke; hobble applied
      to animals given to straying.
      (after MS drawing by Rai Bahadur Hiralal, by permission of the Trustees
      of the British Museum.)



 the weaning process. The young animal may be totally separated from the
 mother or its access may be restricted. The Tuareg keep kids in an enclosure
 or tether them and release them only at certain times to be suckled.
   There are two main groups of devices associated with weaning: those
 which make suckling painful for the mother, and those which make it difficult
or impossible for the young animal. The Nuer tie a ring armed with thorns
round the calf’s muzzle so that it pricks the udder (Fig. 3). The Gonds of
Bihar, about sixty years ago when they were adopting a settled peasant life,
used a device made from four pointed sticks, tied behind the calf’s head
(Fig. 4). An Indian colleague tells me that he has seen this in use by Hindu
peasants, and points out that it prevents not only sucking but also grazing
near ground level. In fact it enforces selective grazing. The Rwala insert a
sharp peg under the nostrils of a camel-calf to prick the udder. The Tuareg
tie the skin of a hedgehog to the muzzle of a kid. They also place a stick
across the mouth, like a bit, and tie it behind the horns (Fig. 5); or pass a stick
through the kid’s cheeks. A stick is passed through the nasal septum of the
calves of cattle (Fig. 6). In the case of camel calves they pierce the upper lip
and pass through it a length of root, which is then knotted at each end. This
makes suckling painful for the mother; but more important (and like the two
latter methods described for kids), it prevents the calf from sucking by
admitting air. The Tuareg also make cuts on the noses of calves, of both
camels and cattle, which make sucking painful for them. These methods, it
258   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    Cranstone




Fig 5 Weaning. A stick tied across the mouth of a kid to prevent sucking.
      Chawiya, Sahara.
      (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Taureg.
      Copenhagen. Fig. 19.)

will be noted, do not affect the ability of the young animal to graze. When the
need for extra milk is temporary both the Tuareg and the Rwala cover the
udder of a she-camel with a pouch or net (Fig. 7). The Lapps smear the
udders of reindeer does with excrement to discourage the fawns.
   Insects are a major pest to most domesticated animals, causing, at best,
loss of milk, and often seriously affecting their condition. The annual migra¬
tions of the Lapps to the plateaux and of the Kazak from the river valleys
where they spend the winter to the open steppes are governed as much by the
need to escape from insects as by the requirements of pasture. The Nuer
confine their cattle at night in byres, all the chinks of which are plugged with
dung. Smoky dung fires are made inside. The cattle are described as emerging
in the morning dazed and staggering. Mosquitoes sometimes cause the
reindeer of the Tungus to stampede. The herder builds a smudge fire round
which the herd congregates by day, grazing by night. The annual south¬
ward migration of the Fulani is in search of pasture and water in the dry
season, but their return northwards in the wet season is enforced by the
tsetse fly. The Bavenda of the north Transvaal keep their cattle in kraals until
the middle of the morning to avoid ticks. Their cattle suffer from flies and




Fig 6 Weaning. A forked stick passed through the nasal septum of a calf,
      to make suckling painful for the cow. Tuareg.
      (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg.
      Copenhagen. Fig. 31.)
                       Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography     259




Fig 7 Goat’s hair net bag which is tied over the udder of a she-camel to
     conserve her milk for human use. Tuareg.
     (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg.
     Copenhagen. Fig. 41.)


heat in confinement, but the Bavenda say that the ticks, which are a major
 danger to cattle, go underground as the day gets hotter28.
   There remains a number of miscellaneous techniques and devices which
deserve mention.
   Animals are sometimes hobbled, usually to prevent their wandering too
far while grazing during a halt: a practice, therefore, applied to beasts being
used for riding, pack transport or draught rather than to herds under the care
of a herdsman. The Gonds (and, no doubt, Indian villagers) applied a form
of wooden hobble to cattle which had a habit of wandering from the herd
(Fig. 4). The Tuareg hobble camel calves during weaning so that they
cannot keep up with their mothers when grazing. Many peoples tie the
hind legs of cows during milking with a “spancel”. Hobbles are used on rams
by the Tuareg to prevent or impede breeding.
   The catching of incompletely domesticated or trained animals may
present difficulty. When holding their annual round-ups, at which they sort
their reindeer by their ear-marks, the Lapps drive them into stockades and
lassoo them. The Kazak catch horses from the herds for riding by means of a
noose on the end of a pole, used from horse-back.
   Some African peoples train the horns of their cattle for aesthetic reasons.
The Dinka do this by paring away a portion of the surface so that the horn
grows in the desired curve29; the Nuer make an oblique cut in the horn,
which achieves the same object.
   The practice of identifying animals by ear-marking is widely spread,
being recorded from, for example, the Lapps30, the Sonjo31 and the Tuareg32.
   In New Guinea, where pigs normally forage freely, gardens are often
fenced to keep them out; but even so some pigs become adept at gaining
entry. The peoples at the headwaters of the Sepik apparently blind such pigs
by levering out the eye with a stick, piercing it “to let out the water”, and
allowing it to return to the socket (I have not seen this, but I heard of it
260   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    CRANSTONE


from reliable informants). Elsewhere in northern New Guinea these trouble¬
some pigs are discouraged from rooting by having a thin slice cut from the tip
of the snout, which is kept always raw.
   Finally, the method of slaughtering animals is often rigidly prescribed,
especially in contexts of sacrifice, presentation or the acquisition of prestige
or rank. But this would be a subject for a separate contribution.



      Animal husbandry and the archaeologist

The interaction of material and non-material aspects of culture is always
complicated, and there is no space here for discussion of the effects of
dependence on animal husbandry on other aspects of social and economic
fife. However, in the present context a few comments of special relevance
to archaeology may be justified.
   That full pastoral nomadism leads to impoverishment of material culture
has often been remarked. Nomads must travel light. They are not likely to use
pottery, or numbers of metal vessels, or any but the simplest household goods.
Their dwellings must be portable. Non-functional art objects—made for
purely ritual or decorative purposes—are likely to be absent. Their clothing
and utensils are often made from animal products: skins, wool, horn, bone.
In the environments in which many of them five even wood is scarce.
   Many of their artefacts, being of perishable materials, would be unlikely to
survive in an archaeological context. This is true of all the devices shown
in Figs. 2 to 7.
   But this point must not be pressed too far. The more complete the direct
dependence of a people on their animals, as in the case of the Bedouin or the
Kazak, the more essential is contact with other peoples. I have said that all
nomads obtain some vegetable food. The Kazak obtained many other goods—
luxuries as well as necessities—from the towns or from itinerant traders. The
Bedouin trade their camels not only for grain but for rifles and ammunition,
cloth for their tents, and all sorts of utensils. Only the very poorest bedouin
families lack a set of vessels for preparing and serving coffee. Moreover,
although non-functional art may be lacking among such peoples, decora¬
tion is applied to harness-trappings and weapons and wealth may be con¬
verted into jewellery.
   Paradoxically, those whose dependence on their animals is less total are
sometimes more restricted in the range if not in the bulk of their material
culture, perhaps because being more self-sufficient they have less need to
establish contacts with other peoples. The Nuer provide an example.
   Settlement patterns, which are often relatively simple for peoples who live
mainly by agriculture, may become more complex when animal husbandry is
of greater economic importance. Most pastoral nomads have a base. The
Tuareg have the oases with their gardens where women, children and the
                       Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography      261


elderly remain and where craftsmen practise their trades. The Kazaks
spent the winter in scattered family groups in river-valley sites which were
clan property and to which they returned each year, living in semi-sub¬
terranean houses with turf or stone walls. There were also groups who
practised irrigation agriculture in the valleys and were permanentiy settled.
These included some poor Kazak families who lacked livestock as well as
people of different origins. The Lapps, too, have their settlements, occupied
mainly by the elderly, women and children, in more recent times in the
neighbourhood of “church villages”, where they made huts of sods supported
by a timber frame.
   The Rwala have no similar base. To some extent the villages of the desert
fringe, near which they camp during July and August, fulfil the same function.
However, some Rwala spend even these hottest months at desert water-holes.
They are the most completely nomadic of the peoples considered here.
   The Nuer, with a much more widely based economy, present a rather
different picture, but among them too the village sites, situated on sandy
ridges above flood level, are occupied only for part of the year. During
the early part of the dry season, when the floods have receded, the young
people lead a nomadic life with the herds while the elderly and the children
remain in the village and tend the crops. When the harvest is completed and
the pasture withers in the drought all congregate together at riverside camps,
returning to the villages as the floods rise again.
   Clearly village sites which are occupied permanently or for part of every
year could be expected to yield archaeological evidence. The same is true of
camping sites which for various reasons are occupied year after year: the
Rwala camp at wells, which are themselves artefacts, being made or improved
by man. But the route of the Kazak during spring and summer varies each
year according to the incidence of showers and, therefore, of pasture, and the
same is true of the herding groups of the Tuareg and the Rwala. Many of
their camp sites would leave little trace.
   If in a certain area evidence should be found for both a settled life and a
nomadic herding life, analogy with the peoples discussed here suggests that a
number of different explanations have to be considered. It could indicate the
presence of two distinct peoples each exploiting the natural environment in
different ways, as in the case of the Fulani and the settled peoples among
whom they move in the southern part of their range. It could result from
groups of the same people leading differently based lives, as in the case of the
Fulani and the Kazak, each of whom have settled elements. It could suggest a
life similar to that of the Tuareg, many of whom live permanently in the
oasis settlements while others tend the herds at great distances. Or it could
represent different phases of an annual cycle, as in the cases of the Nuer and
the nomadic Kazak.
   Animak are the only form of wealth which is self-mobile. People who
depend heavily on animals are, therefore, usually warlike, because they
262    Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals      CRANSTONE


have to be prepared to defend their herds. This is especially true of those
whose animals are able to travel far and fast: horses, camels, cattle. It is less
true of sheep and goat herders; and one rarely hears of raiders driving off
herds of pigs. People who herd the more mobile animals must themselves be
mobile. The Kazak and Tuareg mount their sheep and goat herders on oxen,
but clearly only horse- and camel-riders can herd horses and camels. It is this
mobility, combined with hardihood, which has caused the nomads to be
dreaded by the settled peoples throughout history. However they usually
threaten only their neighbours, for their way of life discourages the develop¬
ment of large political units or centralized control, and their chiefs are
unable to gather large numbers or to hold them together. It is only when
they have been welded into a coherent force by a leader of genius that they
have spread far from their own habitat.



       Notes
        1 Valuable background material will be found in Forde, C. D. (1964).
          Habitat, Economy and Society. London; Birket-Smith, K. (i960). Primitive
          Man and his Ways. London; Mourant, A. E. and Zeuner, F. E. (eds.)
          (1963). Man and Cattle. Roy. Anthrop. Inst., London; Zeuner, F. E.
          (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
        2 The mithan is usually considered to be the domesticated form of the gaur.
        3 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). Op. cit. pp. 253-5.
        4 Of course there are exceptions to any such generalizations. The pigs of
          the medieval villager certainly foraged in the woods and must surely have
          interbred with the wild pig.
        5 Stenning, D. J. (1959). Savannah Nomads. London.
       6 See, e.g. Mills, J. P. (1926). The Ao Nagas. London; Stonor, C. R. (1950).
          The feasts of merit among the Northern Sangtam tribe of Assam, Anthro-
          pos, 45.
       7 Layard, J. (1942). Stone Men of Malekula. London.
       8 Layard, J. (1942). Op. cit. p. 240.
       9 Baker, J. R. (1929). Man and Animals in the New Hebrides. London.
      10 Birket-Smith, K. (i960), ibid.; Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture
          of the Pastoral Tuareg. Nat. Mus. of Copenhagen.
      11 Musil, A. (1928). The Manners and Customs of the Rzvala Bedouins. New
          York.
      12 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit. ch. XVI.
      13 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit. ch. XIV.
      14 Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1940). The Nuer. Oxford.
      15 Birket-Smith, K. (i960), op. cit. p. 158.
      16 Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1940). op. cit. pp. 41-5.
      17 Collinder, B. (1949). The Lapps. Princeton, pp. 92-5.
      18 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit. ch. XVII.
      19 Gilmore, R. M. (1950). Fauna and ethnozoology of South America, in
          Steward, J. H. (ed.) Handbook of South American Indians, 6, pp. 429-54.
      20 For the animal-management techniques of the Tuareg, see, especially,
          Nicolaisen, J. (1963). ibid.
      21 Collinder, B. (1949). op. cit. p. 112.
      22 Gray, R. F. (1963). The Sonjo of Tanganyika. London, p. 40.
      23 Nicolaisen, J. (1963). op. cit. p. 70.
                      Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       263


    24 Amoroso, E. C. and Jewell, P. A. (1963). The exploitation of the milk-
       ejection reflex by primitive peoples, in Mourant, A. E. and Zeuner, F. E.
       (1963). ibid.
    25 Ashton, H. (1952). The Basuto. London, pp. 135-6.
    26 Schapera, I. (ed.) (1937). The Bantu-speaking Tribes of South Africa.
       London, pp. 137-41.
    27 Lagercrantz, S. (1950). East Hamitic milking customs, in Contribution to
       the Ethnography of Africa. Studia Etnografica Upsaliensia, 1, Lund.
    28 Stayt, H. A. (1931). The Bavenda. London, p. 39.
    29 Grunnet, N. T. (1962). An ethnographic-ecological survey of the relation¬
       ship between the Dinka and their cattle. Folk, 4.
    30 Collinder, B. (1949). op. cit. p. 91.
    31 Gray, R. F. (1963). op. cit. p. 40.
    32 Nicolaisen, J. (1963). op. cit. pp. 138-40 and Fig. 100.




10—dopaa *   *
     P. DUCOS

     Methodology and results of the study of the earliest
     domesticated animals in the Near East (Palestine)


     Introduction

The beginning of the domestication of animals established a new relationship
between man and animals which, over a certain time, introduced on the one
hand changes in domesticated species which took on new morphological
characteristics, and on the other hand an evolution of human culture in which
new ways of life were adopted as a response to the success in gaining control
of a part of the essential meat supply. In order to assess objectively the
beginnings of domestication it is necessary to concentrate on this very re¬
lationship; it is clear that anatomical features cannot serve to reveal the
beginnings of domestication for domesticated species only undergo trans¬
formation after a considerable number of generations, while indirect archae¬
ological evidence (equipment, architecture, a sedentary existence) is not
sufficient to actually prove primitive domestication.
   In order to investigate the beginnings of domestication in Palestine we
have applied a method which uses neither archaeological nor anatomical data.
Some of the general principles of this method were announced in 1961 and
detailed applications have since been fully published1. To summarize, the
method of acquiring animals (in an ethnological sense) can be ascertained
numerically from analysis of bone collections. The data is of different kinds
and new criteria can be isolated: the frequency of different parts of the
skeleton, the frequency of species, the frequency of different age groups,
are the criteria which we used in our analyses, the two last being the most
important.



      Review of Palestinian prehistory

Following the microlithic industries of the Palestinian Mesolithic (known as
the Natufian) come the first neolithic assemblages, which were found by
Garstang in his famous excavation at Jericho. Jericho, with its stratigraphy
266   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     DUCOS


subsequently confirmed and made more precise by Miss K. Kenyon, remains
one of the type sites for Palestinian prehistory.
  Two Pre-Pottery Neolithic levels (PPN-A and PPN-B), dated by C-14 to
the eighth and the seventh millennium respectively, are followed by a
Pottery Neolithic which is contemporary with the Middle Neolithic of Byblos,
in other words which is dated to the middle of the fifth millennium. On this
evidence there was a break of more than a thousand years in the stratigraphy
of Jericho.
   Perrot’s work at Hagoshrim and Beisamun and his excavations at Munhata
at first suggested that these sites filled the break in the Jericho sequences, but
detailed analysis of the material has shown that the same hiatus does exist at
Munhata; levels 3-6 are contemporary with PPN-B at Jericho, while
Munhata 2 is already contemporary with the Middle Neolithic of Byblos,
and therefore does not pre-date the Pottery Neolithic of Jericho. As the other
sites (Hagoshrim and Beisamun) can be dated to the fifth miUennium it is
necessary to accept this break as common to the whole valley of the Jordan.
   In Palestine the fourth millennium is the period of the Ghassoulian which
was found by Neuville and Mallon at the site of Teleilat-Ghassoul on the
banks of the Dead Sea and which is now better known from Perrot’s excava¬
tions at Beersheba. The Ghassoulian corresponds to the “Chalcolithic” with
metal objects appearing for the first time in a context which otherwise is
essentially still Neolithic.



      Research into the beginnings of animal domestication

Bone assemblages from Ghassoulian sites show that at this time (the fourth
millennium) the different Palestinian cultures knew and practised animal
domestication in a form which one cannot call archaic. On the one hand the
domesticated species are already very different from wild species: catde are
small and very similar to the brachyceros breed; pigs are smaller than any
wild forms of Sus scrofa with certain new cranial characteristics which class
them with turbary pig, although there are certain differences between them;
sheep are heavier than turbary sheep; goats have twisted horns and are also
smaller than wild bezoar goats. On the other hand analysis of the distribution
curves of age groups shows that animals were not only killed for food, but
were also kept for their milk and wool; a considerable number of young
animals were killed. Finally, a comparison of the different sites indicates a
tendency to specialization in animal domestication; on the one hand cattle
and pigs, and sheep and goats on the other. This is a complex picture and
shows that the beginnings of domestication must have been prior to the fourth
millennium and that investigation of the beginnings of animal domestication
must concentrate on the populations which lived after the archaeological
 hiatus of the sixth millennium (Pottery Neolithic) or even on those which
                          The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East       267

preceded the hiatus (Pre-Pottery Neolithic and Natufian). Some of the recent
excavations by the French archaeological mission in Israel have offered the
opportunity to study this problem under particularly fruitful conditions, for
several sites have been excavated which were very rich in animal bones.
These sites fall within a well-defined geographical area, the upper valley of
the Jordan at the levels of lakes Tiberias and Hulah, and they date from both
before and after the archaeological hiatus. This communication is concerned
with the preliminary analyses of this series of excavations which have only
just been completed.
   The period before the archaeological hiatus is represented at Ai'n Mallaha
and in the lower levels (3-6) at Munhata; the period following the hiatus
(the Pottery Neolithic) is represented at Hagoshrim, Beisamun and level 2 at
Munhata.
   Table 1 summarizes the different proportions of species found at the
various sites.


                          Ain           Munhata
                         Mallaha         5-6      Hagoshrim   Beisamun   Munhatta 2

Cervids                    33-4          rare        3-8         1-7         o-o
Gazelles                   44-6          34-1       119          7-2        21-4
Cattle                      3'3          (4-9)      63-5        35-9        187
Large Caprinae(6)           1-6          45-5       14-2        29-4        26-9
Small Caprinae              O             0          0           0          13-3
Pigs                       142           ii-i        56         24-4        15-2
  (a) The proportions given for Munhata 5-6 are still provisional and may have to be
      modified to a certain extent after further analysis.
  (b) Capra hircus + Ovis orientalis.


Table 1 The proportions of different species(<1>


   The presence of Ovis orientalis requires some explanation, for the existence
of this species has never been mentioned in scientific publications on
Palestine. However, it must be borne in mind that Bate’s2 and Vaufrey’s3
studies of prehistoric fauna are not particularly illuminating in this respect.
It is of course very difficult to distinguish morphologically between Ovis and
Capra except on the basis of a few parts of the skeleton. In the series described
by Bate there is only one single bone which is distinctive of Capra, that is the
ankle bone of hircus type. In the Judean desert collections described by
Vaufrey4 there is not a single distinctive piece and Vaufrey writes “it seems
that the bones are those of ibex”.
   If one considers, for example, the scatter diagram of Caprinae first phalanges
at Munhata 5-6 (Fig. 1) it is clear that two species of large Caprinae are
present. The same scatter diagram is obtained for Munhata 2 with, in
addition, a clustering which corresponds with the small Caprinae; these latter
are virtually the only ones found in the Ghassoulian. Scatter diagrams for
Beisamun are similar to those of Munhata 5-6. The large Caprinae include
268   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    DUCOS




            o /Aunhata           z
 Fig i Scatter diagram of Caprinae first phalanges.
      The interrupted line shows the distribution of phalanges of small Caprinae
      from Bir-es-Safadi (Capra hircus and Ovis aries). The existence of two
      species of large Caprinae is clear. Small Caprinae only appear in Munhata 2.

 two species: the larger one is Capra hircus and the other belongs to the genus
 Ovis, for horn cores have been found at Munhata, admittedly not securely
 stratified, and also at Beisamun where their stratigraphic position is certain.
 A study of these horn cores shows that they belong to a sheep of the urial
 group and of the species Ovis orientalis.
    The first point to be noticed is the decrease in frequency of the cervids;
                       The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East    269

whereas they are very plentiful in the Natufian of Ain Mallaha, they are not
found in Munhata 2. This decrease is so marked that we cannot just infer
less emphasis on hunting; what must have occurred was a general decrease of
cervids in Palestine (they are found again on later sites, but are always
few) probably due to the disappearance of forest. We cannot argue in the
same way about the gazelle which maintained its important position, especi¬
ally at Munhata, the southernmost site and the one which is therefore closest
to the semi-arid zone.
   Other features to be noted in Table 1 are:

1 the increase of cattle in Pottery Neolithic sites;
2 the increase of Caprinae from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic onwards;
3 the more or less constant proportions of pigs;
4 the exceptional nature of Hagoshrim with its very high proportion of cattle;
5 the presence of small Caprinae at Munhata 2; a demonstration of this can
  be illustrated by a comparison of the first phalanges of the Caprinae from
  Munhata 2 with those from Munhata 5-6.

   None of the animals at Ain Mallaha were domesticated. It is only possible
to determine age groups for gazelles and boars and these are similar to
those for wild populations except for the rarity of young animals up to one
year old, a feature which can easily be explained with reference to actual
hunting tradition. Cervids, gazelles and pigs make up more than 90% of
the species found, and it is unreasonable to suggest that one of the species
which is found only rarely at this site (for example, cattle) should have
been domesticated.
   At Munhata 5-6 pigs are slightly less frequent than at Ain Mallaha and
cattle only just more frequent. The large Caprinae, which are very frequent,
reveal an age distribution which is rather different from that of wild popula¬
tions, with maxima for the classes between 1-2 years and between 2-4 years.
However, a X2 test, which measures the probability that this difference is not
due to chance, shows that this is not significant (13-93)- The age groups of
pigs at Beisamun is very similar to that at Ain Mallaha (X2 = 9-95); the
distribution of cattle there is like a wild distribution except for the rarity of
the group of animals between 2-4 years and the abundance of animals
between 4-6-5 years; finally, the distribution of Caprinae is similar to a wild
distribution with a X2 of 10-69 which is not significant.
   The only age group distribution which can be determined at Hagoshrim is
for cattle, and this is very different from a natural distribution (A2 = 40-04).
Young animals are rare (less than 10%), old animals practically non-existent,
and the bulk of the animals found are adults of between 4-9 years old. This
exceptional distribution goes hand in hand with a particularly high pro¬
portion of cattle.
   The distribution of pigs at Munhata 2 is very different from that of both
Ain Mallaha and Beisamun and is characterized by a very high proportion of
270   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals       ducos

individuals less than one year old. The distribution is similar to that of the
chalcolithic site of Metzer. The X2 is significant (44-46). The distribution
of cattle is identical to that at Beisamun (X2 = 8-35); that of Caprinae
accentuates the characteristics of the distribution of this group at Munhata
5-6, but this time with a highly significant X2 (94'°5)-
  The interpretation of these results will include comparative material from
other sites but from the outset will be based on one observation. For each of
the three groups there are two fundamental distribution types:
1 for the pigs (Fig. 2), a distribution which is close to a wild distribution
  (Mallaha, Beisamun) and a distribution with a markedly high proportion
  (more than 40%) of individuals under one year of age (Munhata 2,
  chalcolithic Metzer).

   pjgS                                    -      Munhata     2       ,X   =   44.46

                                            __    Beisamurv           )X =     9- 95




 2 for catde (Fig. 3), a distribution which is similar to a wild distribution
   with, nevertheless, a paucity of the age group 2-4 years which appears to
   be compensated by an abundance of the age group 4-6-5 years. This distri¬
   bution type is found also at Beisamun, Munhata 2 and elsewhere at Tell
   Mureybat (Syria, Pre-Pottery), in Ghassoulian sites and in Bronze Age
   Palestine. There is also a distribution with a clear peak where practically all
   the animals are adults, and this is the distribution type at Hagoshrim, at
   £atal Hiiyiik (Anatolia), and at Roucadour (France, Neolithic) for the
   brachyceros breed (whereas at this latter site the primigenius breed has a
   distribution of the first sort).
                         The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East       271

3 for the Caprinae (Fig. 4), there are two different distributions as for cattle.
  The distribution which is similar to the wild one is found at Beisamun and
  also at Bir-es-Safadi (Ghassoulian); the distribution with a maximum of
  age groups 1-3 years is found at Munhata 2 and perhaps also at Munhata
  5-6.

  The pig distribution which shows a clear peak of young animals under one
year of age clearly indicates domestication based on the consumption of very
young animals and the preservation of some adult animals for purposes of
reproduction.

                                               Hagoshrim                   -    40.04

                                               Munhata                      =   8.35

                                               Beisamun                X2,      25.0




                                                                                 ).033




Fig 3 The age group distribution of Bos taurus.
      The hatched zone represents either hunting activities or evolved husbandry.


   It is the distribution of cattle at Hagoshrim, and at £atal Hiiyiik, which
proves domestication, for the difference from a wild distribution cannot be
explained in any other way. On the other hand the other distribution type is
less conclusive. To see in this distribution type the results of hunting activities
is not satisfactory for the same distribution type is found in Bronze Age
sites such as Tel Gat and Tel Nagila where it is impossible that hunting
occurred, not only because these were urbanized civilizations but also
because in this southern area at this time (Tel Nagila is in the semi-arid
zone) no wild cattle existed. It is also difficult to infer the effects of domestica¬
tion from this distribution, for after all, is this not the same distribution
type as found at Tell Mureybat (Pre-Pottery, North Syria) where cattle are
272   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     DUCOS


considerably less frequent than an animal of genus Equus which must at this
time have been wild and where we are without doubt dealing with the activities
of hunters ?
   It is therefore necessary to admit that the significance of this second
distribution type is still unclear and that two sorts of activity could have
resulted in such a distribution. Such a convergence is not difficult to under¬
stand; that hunting should reveal a distribution close to the wild distribution
is consistent with the principles of the method. However, when we are dealing
with an evolved type of animal domestication, such as at Tel Gat, it is
probable that there was a difference in the exploitation of male and female
animals. The females would have been kept for their milk and for reproductive
purposes whereas the males would have been killed while still young and

                                           Beisctmun                T=     AO. 69

                                           Munhata      2                 94.05

                                                                          43.93
                                                                    *'■

                                                                    T-     31.25




only a few adults would have been kept to ensure reproduction. In this way
the distribution curve is made up of these two independent and inverse
distributions (that of the males and that of the females) so that the deficiencies
of one are compensated for by the abundances of the other with the result
that overall it becomes similar to a wild distribution.
   The same arguments can be applied to the Caprinae distributions to which
the same domestication practices apply. To explain the significance of cattle
at Munhata, at Beisamun, and the significance of Caprinae at Beisamun, we
must consider some other factors.
   The domestication of cattle at Hagoshrim (and also at £atal Hiiyuk) is of
an archaic kind; its only aim was to provide meat and the absence of young
                       The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East     273

animals shows a great reluctance to kill animals which had not yet con¬
tributed to the increase of the herd. It follows that it is difficult to conceive
that cattle should have been domesticated in a more sophisticated and
efficient way at Beisamun and Munhata 2 for these two sites are not much
later in date, the proportion of cattle at Munhata 2 is fairly low, and the
proportion of gazelles shows that hunting was still important. In the same way
we must admit that the Caprinae at Beisamun were hunted for their
domestication at Munhata 2 is still of an archaic type.



      Conclusion

We can now summarize the evidence for the beginnings of animal domestica¬
tion in Palestine.
   In the Pottery Neolithic period, after the archaeological hiatus, we find
on the one hand hunters, as at Beisamun, and on the other hunter-pastoralists,
as at Munhata 2 where the domestication was of Caprinae and pigs and at
Hagoshrim where a kind of cattie specialization may have occurred. In the
Pre-Pottery Neolithic period and in the Natufian animal domestication does
not appear to have existed, except perhaps in the case of the Caprinae
at Munhata 5-6 (about which it is not possible to be definite at the
moment).
   These conclusions refer to a clearly defined geographical area, the Upper
Jordan valley, from Lake Tiberias to Lake Houlah. How can they be reconciled
with what is known about the semi-arid zone where an earlier domestication
has been identified by myself at El Khiam and by Perkins at Beidha ? It is
absurd to suggest that domestication was known in southern Palestine in the
seventh millennium, then disappeared and only reappeared again in the fifth
millennium. This situation takes us to an hypothesis about the archaeological
hiatus of the sixth millennium. This hiatus may perhaps correspond to a
decrease in population density in the area, but it seems excessive to suggest
the total disappearance of people from Palestine during this period. The
hiatus could equally well correspond to a period of proto-husbandry which
would be the activity of nomadic populations. Such people would leave so
few remains that archaeologists would only recognize them under exceptional
circumstances. Dining the fifth millennium the Upper Jordan valley would
have seen the transition to settled agriculture, possibly as a result of contacts
between newcomers and existing nomadic populations. This is of course
only an hypothesis whose truth can only be confirmed in two ways: by the
discovery of some sixth millennium habitation sites in Palestine, and by the
study of domestication in the Neolithic settlements of the Syria-Lebanon
zone.
   It is important, finally, to note the separate existence of houses and villages
on the one hand, and animal domestication on the other. It is not possible to
274   Part // Domestication and exploitation of animals        ducos

see domestication as the result of a sedentary way of life, for villages existed
for several thousands of years before domestication occurred. In the same way
it is necessary to note that the domestication of animals does not appear to
have been the result of an increase in aridity which reduced the availability of
wild fauna. If the decrease in the number of cervids argues for a decrease in
forestation, then the increase in the number of cattle and wild Caprinae
argues for a climate which was perhaps more humid than in the Natufian.
The fact that the cultures which settled in Palestine were diversified, with
differing food-producing bases, proves that we should find elsewhere older
groups of people practising domestication, perhaps even in the sixth millen¬
nium. It remains true, nevertheless, that the domesticated species at Munhata
2 and at Hagoshrim are very similar to wild forms (it is only at Munhata 2
that we find some Caprinae which are smaller than wild forms and these
cannot have been the only ones to have been domesticated) which shows
that, although it is probable that there were older centres of domestication,
the upper regions of the Jordan valley were a focus of domestication in the
fifth millennium B.C.5




      Notes
       1 Ducos, P. (1965). Contribution a l’etude des origines de la domestication,
         Thesis, Faculte des Sciences de Bordeaux; Ducos, P. (1968). L’origine
         des animaux domestiques en Palestine, Pub. de Ulnst. de Prehist. de
         PUniv. de Bordeaux, 4.
       2 Bate, D. M. A. (1937). The fossil fauna of the Wadi-al-Mughara caves,
         in Garrod, D. A. E. The Stone Age of Mount Carmel, I. Oxford, pp. 134-
         240.
       3 Vaufrey, R. (1951). Etude paleontologique, I. Mammiferes, in Neuville, R.
         Le Paleolithique et le Mesolithique du Desert de Judee, Arch, de VInst, de
         PaUontologie Humaine, 24, pp. 198-217.
       4 Vaufrey, R. (1951). ibid.
       5 I must specify my position on the use of trinomials in referring to domesti¬
         cated animals. The argument against using sub-specific names for domesti¬
         cated animals depends on the fact that their differentiation is of a different
         kind from the different geographical forms of wild species. But such an
         argument leads to paradoxical postulates. If one calls wild cattle Bos
         primigenius and domesticated cattle Bos taurus, it follows that one accepts
         that domestication of the species primigenius has led to morphological
         changes which resulted in a new species, taurus, and one cannot deny the
         possibility that domestication has in addition led to the creation of sub¬
         species. The opposite approach which would call the domestic pig Sus
         scrofa is also paradoxical, for 22 sub-species of wild Sus scrofa are recog¬
         nized. Domesticated pigs differ morphologically from all the wild sub¬
         species even more than do the wild forms between themselves and surely
         these domesticated pigs can be considered as one or more sub-species.
             Bohlken, H. (1961). Haustiere und Zoologische Systematik, Z.
          Tierziicht. ZuchtBiol., 76 (1), pp. 107-13, has shown the necessity of
          using a trinomial classification for domesticated animals and has proposed
          a scheme which, although subject to discussion, has the merit of showing
              The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East    275

the phylogeny of these forms. Until general agreement is reached, I
would prefer to use a trinomial classification in deference to the rules
agreed in the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.
  In view of the editorial policy adopted throughout this book, I have
agreed not to use the trinomial nomenclature. The terms primigenius and
brachyceros are used here as subspecific names, and the large Caprinae
Capra hircus is, in fact, Capra hircus aegagrus.
      CAROLINE GRIGSON

       The uses and limitations of differences in absolute size
      in the distinction between the bones of aurochs
      (Bos primigenius) and domestic cattle (Bos taurus)

      Introduction

 One of the most obvious differences between domestic and wild cattle is that
the domestic cattle (Bos taurus, in this case) are almost all smaller than their
wild ancestor, the aurochs (Bos primigenius). Bohlken1 showed how very
close wild and domestic taurine cattle are in their skull characters; indeed he
saw no reason for their classification as separate species. Fig. i, in which
measurements of some aurochs cows have been added to Bohlken’s graph of
basal length plotted against palatal length for aurochs bulls and modern
domestic cattle of both sexes, shows that in spite of some overlap a reduction
in size is one of the most obvious effects of domestication. The question there¬
fore arises whether it is justifiable to use small size as diagnostic for domestica¬
tion when cattle bones are excavated from archaeological sites.
   It must first be stressed that this paper is not concerned with the formula¬
tion of a general principle on the effect of domestication, but merely with the
distinction between the bones of B. taurus and B. primigenius.
   Comparisons between the dimensions of various bone samples are best
made with statistical methods as used by Kurten, Simpson and others2. It
has been argued that measurements of bones from archaeological sites cannot
be used in calculations that require random samples because the animals
were probably selected for killing. However some bias occurs in most
palaeontological samples as the bones may get sorted (a) while the animals
are still alive, (b) by burial or fossilization, (c) by exposure, and (d) by collec¬
tion3. In the case of an archaeological sample of bones bias due to the first
of these categories would have been caused by man (though perhaps less by
hunting than by stock-rearing activities) but, on the other hand, bias due to
the other possible causes is often minimized.
   Correct identification of genus is obviously of the first importance. The
bones most likely to be confused with those of B. taurus and B. primigenius
Basal length
                             Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle   279

belong to the bison, but distinctive criteria for many parts of the skeleton
have been worked out by Stampfli4. There are so few reports of post-glacial
bison in Northern Europe, and those that do exist are from very early post¬
glacial times in Denmark and nearby5, that the possible occasional presence
of bison of a post-glacial date is very unlikely to interfere with the validity of
the calculations. However bison were present in Switzerland (for example,
some were identified by Stampfli at Burgaschisee-Sud6) and probably also in
other parts of central and southern Europe.



      Possible factors influencing the size of the aurochs

      Sexual dimorphism and intrinsic variation


The remains have been found in Europe of two different forms of B. primi-
genius which differ from each other mainly in size. Rutimeyer7 considered
that domestic cattle of the “primigenius type” were descended from the
aurochs and that “brachyceros” domestic cattle were descended from a
smaller wild ancestor yet to be discovered. Hitscher8 was the first to describe
a small skull of B. primigenius} which he considered to be from a young
animal. The same skull (and other similar ones) were variously described as
adult dwarfs9, as wild “Bos brachyceros europaeus”10, as domestic Bos taurus
primigeniusu, and as a small wild “Bos urus minutus”12. Hilzheimer13 was the
first to suggest that the small skulls might be from aurochs cows, a view
which was confirmed by Leithner14, who identified several aurochs cow skulls
and one complete skeleton, and in spite of much controversy this view has
come to be generally accepted on the Continent.
   The position is not however the same in Britain: Jackson15 writing on the
aurochs skulls from Maiden Castle does not seem to have considered sexual
dimorphism as a possible reason for their rather small size, and Bilton16
re-identified the B. primigenius skull from Preston (Manchester Museum No.
LL 144A) as domesticated and did not mention sex as a possible explanation
for its relatively small size. The sexual dimorphism of the remains of aurochs
from the mesolithic site of Star Carr is so doubtfully suggested in the report17
that some authors18 interpret the results as indicating that there were two
different varieties of aurochs in Britain. Shawcross19 compared a large. Bronze
Age, aurochs skeleton with the remains of the smaller Star Carr aurochs with¬
out any suggestion that the difference between them might be sexual; on the
other hand Jewell20 considered that the two sizes of aurochs found in Britain
are male and female, as on the continent.
   The author21 has drawn up provisional size ranges for many skull and
some limb bone measurements for male and female aurochs in northern
Europe in post-glacial times. A sexual dimorphism is obvious in almost all the
measurements, the cows being the smaller. In most cases this is only a partial
280   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals       grigson

dimorphism22, as the size ranges overlap, but nevertheless the ranges form a
basis for the sexing of aurochs remains.
  The aurochs was a rather variable animal, and this is particularly true of
the skull where the variability is aggravated by wide sexual dimorphism.
Some examples of the degree of variation are illustrated in Table i.


   Country             Measurement             Sex    Number     Mean       V
                                                                 mm.

N. Europe    length of front of skull           3        24     685         4-9
N. Europe    length of front of skull           9         7     600         5-i
N. Europe    length of front of skull         both       3i     670         6-7
N. Europe    maximum occipital height           3        46     219         5-0
N. Europe    maximum occipital height           9        20     186         6-7
N. Europe    maximum occipital height         both       66     211        10-3
Britain      maximum length astragulus        both       12      87-08      4-28
Denmark      maximum length astragulus        both       31      87-52      4-96
Hungary      maximum length astragulus        both       96      84-12      4-81


Table i Coefficients of variation for various measurements of post-glacial
     Bos primigenius.
     Measurements from Leithner, O. F. (1927). Der Ur, Ber. int. Ges. Erhaltung
     des Wisents, 2, pp. 1-140, and Grigson, C. (In preparation).
     The means and standard deviations were calculated from probability paper
     plots (Harding, J. P. (1949). The use of probability paper for graphical
     analysis of polymodal frequency distributions, J. mar. biol. Ass. U.K., 28,
     pp. 141-53.)


  Various skull measurements of the two sexes taken separately, including
those listed in Table 1, lie on straight lines when plotted on probability paper,
showing that they were normally distributed—there is no suggestion that
either the male or female group could be sub-divided on the basis of size,
which strengthens the view that the existence of two size groups is merely
the expression of a sexual dimorphism23.

      Geological age


There is some evidence, in Germany at least, that the aurochs was larger
during the Pleistocene than in post-Pleistocene times24. British material has
not been studied in detail and the situation is complicated by the assumption
that the B. primigenius skulls in the British Museum (Natural History) are
Pleistocene in date- ' although, in fact, the early dating of some of them is very
doubtful: the Kirkcudbrightshire skull (36405) is labelled “turbary deposit”,
the Twickenham skull (M5970) was “dredged from the Thames” and the
Atholl skull (M2245) is marked “Pleistocene ?”; they are about the same size
as those of definitely recent date in Denmark; but the undoubted Pleisto¬
cene specimens from Ilford are certainly enormous. The magnificent late-
glacial skull from Faaborg (University Zoological Museum, Copenhagen)
seems to belong to the Pleistocene rather than the Recent size group.
                              Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle   281


   However it is the possible decrease in size during the post-Pleistocene period
that is of more practical importance. Degerbol26 has produced a chart of
various measurements of skulls and bones from complete skeletons of B.
primigenius in Denmark which suggest that there was a slight decrease in size
between the Pre-Boreal and Sub-Boreal periods. However when this chart is
expanded (Figs. 2 and 2a) with measurements from archaeological sites and
with recently dated skulls and skeletons (especially the Bronze Age skeleton
from Lowes Farm27) from Denmark, N.W. Germany, and England no such
diminution is apparent. Therefore it seems likely that the aurochs did not de¬
crease in size in northern Europe between the Mesolithic and the Bronze Age.



      Isolation

Interbreeding forms that are inter-fertile cannot diverge if they are able to
breed freely, so that groups of animals of smaller stature than the members of
the main population could only be set up if they were to be isolated from that
population in one way or another. The main kinds of natural isolation are
geographical, distance, ecological, and biological, but domestication by man
might mimic the effects of natural isolation28.

     Geographical isolation


The past distribution of B. primigenius was extremely wide, ranging from
N.W. Europe and N. Africa through Russia into eastern Asia, and into the
Near East. Its eastern and southern extensions are still not clear partly
because of the possibility of the spread of B. namadicus outside its Indian
range; the distribution is particularly doubtful for the post-Pleistocene period.
It is certainly possible that populations of aurochs could have become
geographically isolated in particularly difficult or mountainous country
within this huge area (as seems to have happened with another large ox—the
kouprey {Bibos sauveli) in the mountains of the Laos-Cambodian border). A
form of geographical isolation more likely to have occurred could have been
on islands; for example, the aurochs remained on some of the Danish islands
after they had become separated from the mainland. It has been said29 that
the reduction in gene flow caused by island isolation is likely to result in a
decrease in stature in large mammals, including artiodactyls. However, if size
changes occur as a result of geographical isolation the measurements of
animals from such a population would still be normally distributed.

     Distance isolation


Size differences might be expected to exist between potentially interbreeding
animals which, although forming part of the same continuous geographical
  282           Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals                                                                   GRIGSON


                                                                                                      D                                          (4]
                                                                  (1)            D                                                               (4)
                                               (.1)   (1)   (1)
                                                                  (2)                                                  roronro                   (4)
                                                                                                                                                 (5j
                                                                  (2)            D (1)                E (la)
                                                                                                                                                 (3
                                                                                                                                                 (6
                                                                  (2)
                                                                  (1)                                                                            (6
                                                                                 D
                                                                                                      E (la)
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                       cb cb cb cb
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                         E
                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               E
                                               E
                                               E
                                               D                                 D                                                       E
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                         E

                                                                                 Ronnebaeksholm
                                               Stokholthusene                                                                            0rting
                                               Vig                                                                                       /stbirk
                                               Goderupsgaard




                               Faaborg 111
                                                                                                                                         Pindstrup
                                               Graenge                           Khahstrup                                               Maiden Castle
                                               Graenge                                                Langeland        M X ^ X           Maiden Castle
                                                                                                                        o Q) 0) d)
                                               Graenge                                                                                   Maiden Castle
                                                                                 Paahorg V
      w                                                                                                                £2 p        ,0
      EH                                       Star Carr                                              East Ham          U ^ £-i fn
                                                                                                                        Q) Q) d) <D
                                                                                                                                         Bunds/
      M                                        Star Carr                                                                                 Barkholmer
      m                                                                                                                I—1 1—1 1—1 1—1
                                                                                 Ullerslev            East Ham
                                               Star Carr                                                               H r—1 H H         County Farm
                                               Vigersted                                                                W W w w          Lowes Farm

                  mm

                  610    -
      3           600    -     ©                                                         ©
      5           590    -
                                                                                 ©                                                                                   ©
      §           580    -
      m           570    '
      Eh          560    -
      g           550    -                                                                                                               9
      w           540    -                                                                            ©
      *
      3
                  530
                  520
                         -
                         -
                                                                                             o                                               ©                  •

      m           510    -                            #
      m           500    -
                                                                  O
                  490    -
                  480    -



                   400   -     9
                   390   -
                   380   -
                   370   -
      w            360   -
      3            35° -                                                         •                                          ®
      3            340 -                                                                              9
      w            330 -
                                                                                                                       ©        ®
      |            320 -
      1            310 -
      §            300 -                                    ©                        ©
      S            290 -
                   280 -
      5            270 -                                                                     0
      ^            260 ~
       m           250 -
       w           240 -                                                                                                                             ®
       g
       o
                   230 -
                   220 -
                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                          o
       g           210 -                                          o°°                                                                                o
       2           200 -
                   190 -                                                0
                   180 -                                                                                                                         o
                   170 -

      E-l ffi
      ou           190   -
                   180   -     ©
      fi^          170   -                       @®®®«                                     •
      E=r          160   -                                                       ®           o ©                                                                •    •
       eg          150   -

                              111'                          IV                         V          Vll                   Vll/Vlll                         Vlll
■POTJ.-RN       Danish
ZONES           English                                               1V-V                                  Vila                                                    Vlld

                Climatic      Late                    Pre-Boreal                 early            Atlantic Atlantic/                             Sub-Boreal
PERIOD                       Glacial                                             Boreal                    Sub-Boreal
                Archaeo¬
                                                                        Mesolithic                                                       Neolithic & Bronze
                 logical
                                                                                                  1                1                                                       V
Very approximate                                                                                                                                                         4<)0
                                             8, 000                                          6,000                         3,000
Dates BC



    Figs 2 and 2a. The size of Bos primigenius in Northern Europe in post¬
    glacial times.
                The measurements of many dated skulls and metapodials plotted according
                to their pollen dates show that there is no reason to suppose that the aurochs
                decreased in size between Pre-Boreal and Sub-Boreal times.
                   D: Danish, E: English, G: North German.
                   ®: bulls, O: cows, (•): sex uncertain.
                                   Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle                              283


                                                                                     E (la)         (4a)

                                 Stokholthusene D (1)
                                                                     (1)
                                                                     (1)                            (6)
                                                                     (1)                            (7)
                                                                     (1)
                                                                     (1)             D (5a)         (7)
                                                                                                    (7)
                                                        D            D
                                                                     D
                                                                     D
                                                                     D
                                                                     D               D (5a)      D
                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                 E

                                 Vig            D
                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                 E


                                                                     Svaerdborg
                                 Graenge        D
                                                                                                 Pindstrup



                                                        Ullerslev
                                                                                     East Ham
     SITE
                                                                     Svaerdborg                  Woodhenge
                                                                     Svaerdborg                  Lowes Harm
                                                                                     Dyrholmen   Snail Down
                                 Star Carr      E (l)
                                                                     Holnegaard
                                                                                                 Snail Down
                                                                     Holmegaard      Dyrholmen   Snail Down
            tu       mm
    p5 g             270 -
                     260 - ©
    5                250 -                m
                                                                     O
                                                                     O               @
                     240 -                              O           ©
                     230 -                      @                            O                   0         ®o
    fSi


                     300    -
    gw               290    -                                                                         ®
                     280    -                           O
    < •              270    -                                                                    O®
    en W
    .w jj


                                  IV                    V               VI               Vll Vlll
                 Dan:'-sh
ZONES            English                  1V-V                                    Vila              Vlld

                 Climatic        Pre-
                                                                    Boreal        Atlantic Sub-Boreal
FERIOD                          Boreal
                 Archaeo¬                                                                        Neolithic
                  logical                               Mesolithic                               & Bronze

Very approximate
                                                                               4-             '               N '/
                                )8,000                                       6,000         3, 300           40 0
Dates BC

   (Chart and all measurements based on Degerbol, M. (1962). Ur und Hausrind,
   Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 76 (2-3), pp. 243-51, except where otherwise stated.
   1: author, ia: Banks, C. (1961). Report on the recently discovered remains
   of the wild ox {Bos primigenius Bojanus) from East Ham, London Naturalist,
   41, pp. 54-8, 2: Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954)- Faunal remains, in
   Clark, J. G. D. Excavations at Star Carr. Cambridge, pp. 70-95. 3: Requate,
   H. (1957). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures {Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827) nach
   Schadel- und Skelettfunden in Schleswig-Holstein. Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol.,
   70, pp. 297-338. 4: Jackson, J. W. (1943). Animal bones—1 Neolithic, in
   Wheeler, R. E. M. Maiden Castle, Dorset, London, pp. 360-7. 5: Degerbol,
   M. (1939). Dyreknogler, in Mathiassen T. Bundso en yngre Stenalders
   Boplads paa Als, Aarboger for Nordisk Oldkundighed og Historie 1939. pp.
   85-198. 5a: Mathiassen, T., Degerbol, M. and Troels-Smith, J. (1942).
   Dyrholmen. En stenaldersboplads paa Djursland.i^/. Dansk. Vid. Selskab.
   Arkaeol.-kunsthist. 1. 6: Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). The
   excavation of a Bos primigenius at Lowe’s Farm, Littleport, Proc. Camb. Ant.
   Soc., 54, pp. 3-16. 7: Jewell, P. (forthcoming.))
284   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals        grigson


distribution, were actually prevented from interbreeding by a great physical
distance between them. The author, using various measurements, has pre¬
pared histograms of the size of the bones of post-glacial B. primigenius in
various area (e.g. Figs. 3-5), although not all the measurements are available
from each of the areas. The histograms suggest a close similarity in size
between the aurochs found in different parts of N.W. Europe (Sweden,
Denmark, Schleswig-Holstein, and Britain). Although the number of
measurements available is rather small (except for the Danish material) it has
been possible, in some cases, to apply tests of statistical difference. The results
are given in Table 2 and show that there is no significant difference between

                                         Mean                          Probability
  Country        Measurement     No.     (mm.)    s (mm.)       t     outside limits

Britain      least breadth        II    220-45    29-32     \     0
Denmark      frontal                    220-65                           >90%
                                  23              31-50     I0'01?8

Britain      maximum              12     87-08
                                                   ^       0-3091        70-80%
Denmark      length               3i     87-52     4-3426/
Hungary      astragulus           96     84-12     4-0447 3-997          <o-i%


Table 2    A comparison of bone sizes of post-glacial Bos primigenius from
      different areas.
      The table shows no significant difference between the aurochs of the N.W.
      European countries, but does reveal a significant difference between those
      from Denmark and Hungary.


the samples from Denmark and Britain and that the means of both samples
are almost identical for frontal breadth and astragulus length.
   The results are very different, however, when the size of the aurochs from
Hungary is compared with that of the northern aurochs. A statistical test on
astragulus length shows a very significant difference (measurements from
Bokonyi30), the Hungarian animals being the smaller and such a difference is
also apparent on the histogram (Fig. 5).
   The apparently smaller size of the Hungarian aurochs might be an example
of Bergman’s rule that mammals decrease in size with increasing southerly
latitude, although more research is needed before this can be definitely
established. It suggests a north-south cline of decreasing stature, so great care
must be taken when cattle remains from southern Europe, and more particu¬
larly from the Near East and Africa, are compared with those of north¬
western Europe.

      Ecological isolation


B. primigenius is generally considered to be a woodland animal (although the
wide spread of its horns would have prevented it from moving in dense
forest), but the possibility (although there is no evidence for it) that there
                                         Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle          285



             BOS PRIMIGENIUS. SKULL - Least frontal breadth.
    n
    5        Denmark
    4
    3
    2
    1

             Sweden
 4
    3
 2
1


4
             Britain
 3
2
1
                                                                       n
4
             NW Germany
3
2
X

                 170   180   190   200   210   220   230   240   250   260   270   280   290 mm




            BOS PRIMIGENIUS. PROXIMAL PHALANX - Proximal breadth.
8
7
            Denmark
6
5
4
3
2
1 ■


3 •
2       ■
            Britain
1 -


3 ■         Sweden
2 •
1       ■




                          33 34 35 36 37 3339 40 41 42 43 44 45 4647 48 49 50 51 52



            3 and 4 The size of post-glacial Bos primigenius in various parts of
            Northern Europe.
            The histograms suggest, and this can be statistically confirmed, that the
            aurochs of Denmark, Sweden, N. Germany, and Britain were of the same
            size.
               German measurements from Requate, H. (1957). Zur Naturgeschichte
            des Ures {Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827) nach Schadel- und Skelettfunden
            in Schleswig-Holstein. Z. Tierziicht. ZiichtBiol., 70, pp. 297-338.
286   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals          GRIGSON



        BOS PRIMIGENIUS. ASTRAGULUS - Maximum length.

 n
 5      Denmark
                                                   d>
 4
                                                   cf»
 3
                                $
 2
                            T       —LTL                 c? c?




 4      Sweden
 3
 2
 1
      m
        Britain
 4
 3
 2
 1




 4        NW Germany
 3
 2
 1


11
10
 9
 8        Hungary
 7
 6
 5
 4
 3
 2
 1
                                                                   n
            76 77 78 79 80 3182 83 84 85 8687 88 89 90 91 92 9394 95 96 97 98   mm


Fig 5 The size of Bos primigenius in Hungary.
      The histogram also shows that although the aurochs in different parts of
      Northern Europe were of the same size, it seems probable that the Hungarian
      aurochs was slightly smaller, at least in post-glacial times.
        German measurements from Requate, H. (1957)- ibid. Hungarian measure¬
      ments from Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn
      und das Problem der Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung., 14,
      pp.175-214-
                            Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle   287


were separate “woodland” and “plains” forms, as in the case of the American
bison should not be overlooked.

     Biological isolation


Since members of the various Bos, Bibos, Bison and Bubalus species can
actually hybridize, it is often considered that they should be classified as
varieties of the same species. It seems, however, very unlikely that such
hybridization ever happened without the interference of man. Herds of two
closely related Bibos species, the gaur and the banteng, came within one or
two miles of each other31 yet there are no recorded hybrids. It seems possible
that such biological isolation could have occurred between groups within the
same species; the aurochs must have been a herd animal and it is at least a
theoretical possibility that preference for mating within the herd might have
led to a reduction in gene flow and partial isolation.

     Domestication by man


Interference by man in the lives of animals can be of many sorts and of
varying degrees. Competition for land, forest clearance, agriculture and forest
fires would have interfered with, and restricted the natural habitats of animals.
Various forms of hunting, such as killing or maiming with missiles, trapping,
driving into caves or pens or over cliffs must have had some effect on the
natural animal populations.
   It is only a small step from certain methods of hunting to following, or
perhaps even controlling, the movements of cattle herds. Domestication
is usually recognized when an animal breeds under artificial conditions, and
it is at this point that real isolation from the wild form occurs32. However,
one cannot say how early on in the process of man’s interference with the
herds normal gene flow would have been reduced nor how early on this would
have had a recognizable morphological effect.
   In addition to the reduction in size which would follow the isolation of
animals, one would expect man to select for small size; to keep captive or
handle a massive bull with horns several feet long would be anything but
easy! If the wild and domestic forms were present in the same area, occasional
crossings could be expected, whether intentional or accidental. Apart from
the genetic effect of domestication there might be a phenotypic reduction in
size caused by the possible deficiencies of primitive stock-keeping.



      Conclusion

Only one of these various kinds of isolation is definitely known to have
reduced the size of the aurochs: domestication by man, and where the
288   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   grigson


presence of man can be assumed archaeologically this would be the most likely
explanation for the presence of cattie that are smaller than local aurochs. Any
such size change which was occurring naturally would have been a fairly
slow process and would have resulted in a normal distribution of measure¬
ments within that population. The size range of animal bones from a single
population, which had been preyed on by man and which are found in an
archaeological site, will obviously not exceed the normal size range within the
population as a whole. On sites where one finds a wide range of measure¬
ments from those of the aurochs downwards, one may suspect that domestica¬
tion was in progress; although it does not seem possible on this type of data
to distinguish between actual domestication and hybridization between
imported domestic cattle and the local wild population. In either case, how¬
ever, a wider than normal distribution of measurements occurs, and this may
help to distinguish a “domestic” factor from other possible natural causes
of small size in B. primigenius.



      The recognition of domestic cattle bones

When cattle bones are found on archaeological sites how can one decide, on a
metrical basis, whether they were those of wild or domestic animals ? Ideally
their measurements should be statistically compared to a large number of
measurements of animals known to be “wild aurochs”.
  When working with any aurochs sample it is important to remember the
wide sexual dimorphism of the aurochs so that the bones of cows are correctly
identified. Any comparisons made must be between contemporary samples, for
aurochs may differ in size in different periods (although such differences do
not seem to have occurred in post-glacial N.W. Europe). Samples must also
be from the same locality, for aurochs may have been of different sizes in
different places. At the present time measurements of B. primigenius are
usually too few to satisfy theses ample requisites and assumptions about the
wild and domestic status of bones from archaeological sites must remain
doubtful. However, it is to be hoped that with careful extrapolation of
existing data, and the eventual collection of much more data, domestication
in cattle will become easy to recognize metrically.



      Some examples of the use of the size ranges of Bos
      primigenius
      B urgaschisee- Siid


Histograms based on Stampfli’s33 Bos identifications at this Swiss Cortaillod
site reveal (see Fig. 6) three main size groups. Stampfli interprets them
                              Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle      289




                            SCHEME          A   (after Stampfli)

                      1      (la)       2               3          (3a)




Fig 6 The distinction between Bos primigenius and Bos taurus—1.
      The histograms show two alternative interpretations of the Bos measure¬
     ments from the Swiss Cortaillod site of Burgaschisee-Siid: either the Swiss
     aurochs was much smaller than that of Northern Europe or animals inter¬
     mediate in size between wild and domestic cattle were present. This demon¬
     strates the difficulty of the use of absolute size in identification when the size
     of the local aurochs is not known.
        Swiss measurements from Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P., and Stampfli, H. R.
     (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).
290   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals            GRIGSON


as (i) domestic cattle, (2) wild cows, and (3) wild bulls (see Scheme A, Table
3). If this interpretation is accepted, aurochs at this site are much smaller
than in Denmark (and north-western Europe), and this is confirmed by the
highly significant difference in astragulus length from Burgaschisee-Siid and
from the Danish mesolithic site of Svaerdborg (see Table 4).


                                                     Scheme B
                    Scheme A<0)                (possible alternative)

          1. Domestic                     1. Domestic

             (ia? Intermediate size)    \ 2. Intermediate (crosses or local
          2. Wild cows                  J    domestication ?)

          3. Wild bulls                   3. Wild cows

          (3a. Very large wild bulls)     4. Wild bulls


Table 3   Alternative schemes for the identification of Bos at Burgaschisee-
      Siid.
  (a) This scheme is implied by Stampfli in Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli,
      H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).



  There are, however, a few very large Bos bones (e.g. a horncore) at
Burgaschisee-Siid which suggest the possibility of a fourth size group (see
Scheme B, Table 3). Stampfli points out that the status of the animals in his
middle size group (ia? and 2) can only be clarified when the lower size
limit of wild cows is known, and this emphasizes the importance of com¬
parative local samples.


       Site               Measurement    No.      Mean       s          t     Probability t
                                                  mm.       mm.               outside limits

Svaerdborg           proximal            34       38-47    3-695]
                     breadth                                     f 6-774         <o-i%
Burgaschisee-Siid    prox phalanx        51       33-37    3-tSiJ

Table 4    A comparison of bone sizes of the “Bos primigenius” of Denmark
      (the mesolithic site of Svaerdborg) and Switzerland (the Cortaillod site
      of Burgaschisee-Siid).
      (Swiss measurements from Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P., and Stampfli, H. R.
      (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).)


      Bos primigenius in British Neolithic sites

Measurements of cattle bones from British neolithic sites plotted against
measurements of north-western European aurochs show that the FusselTs
Lodge34 Bos foot bones are of domestic size (Fig. 7), that wild catde were
hunted at Windmill Hill35, and suggests that the special large British neolithic
                                                        Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle                                                 291


    bones               domestic cattle                                                          Bos primigenius                                      no. of bones
      1-                                                                                                                                                    Danish
                                                                                                                                                              - 16


                                                                                                                                                                  14


                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                        Ik ml
                                                                                        .


                                                                                           Sii tSw mi                                                             10

                                                                                                   ■                        teHf s—
4
                                                                                               ■ IbI                        BUI                                   8
                                                                           mi               ■-
                                                                                                                                  I
3 ►-                                                                       w                                                   ' S III


2 --
                                                                       4     1          ilil            iii
                                                                                                                  mi■ iH
                                                                                                                            itKt ill
                                                                                                                                   lipj
                                                                                                                                                 I.
                                                                                                                                                                  6


                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                        III                                             ii 1
                             i                                      III iii                                ...    §i!ll I'll Hi                             -«    2

                                                                   m iji l 1
            t    t       t
                                  I
                                  t   t      t     t     t
                                                          '/y.-




                                                                  t      t    t     t            t
                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                       t         t    t
                                                                                                                       IU
                                                                                                                           t      t         t   t
                                                                                                                                                 Ill
                                                                                                                                                 an |a
                                                                                                                                                       t
            26   27     28    29      30     31    32   33        34     35   36    37           38   39         40   41   42    43     44      45     46   mm.

                                                                      Danish                          Windmill                  Fussell’s
                     Reference:            Star Carr
                                                                      Maglemosian                     Hill                      Lodge



    Fig 7 The distinction between Bos primigenius and Bos taurus—2.
          The histograms show that the footbones from the possible hide burial at
          Fussell’s Lodge long barrow belong to the domestic size group and not with
          the wild cattle (Grigson, C. (1966). The animal remains from Fussell’s Lodge
          long barrow, in Ashbee, P., The Fussell’s Lodge Long Barrow Excavations
          1957, Archaeologia C, 1966, pp. 62-73.)


    domestic ox (proximal breadth of proximal phalanx 35 mm.) claimed for
    Maiden Castle36 was probably wild37.

            Neolithic cattle in Schleswig-Holstein


    Nobis38 was of the opinion that some of the cattle from the TRB site of
    Fuchsberg-Siidensee were intermediate in size between wild and domestic
    cattle and therefore that local domestication was taking place. Histograms
    using the north-west European size ranges of B. primigenius confirm that there
    were animals of intermediate size in Fuchsberg-Siidensee and also in the two
    nearby TRB sites of Weissenfels39 and Bundso40. The wide range of variation
    suggests that domestic animals are somehow involved. However, considera¬
    tions of size alone are not enough to decide between the various possibilities;
    (1) that there was crossing between small domestic cattle (which might have
    been imported) and local wild aurochs, (2) that actual domestication was
    taking place, or (3) that both processes were in operation together.
                                      a tj- ~
                                  =3
 <L>
<- H
4-»
CO
c3                        c3 :
u
 d
 CD
t3
•S3
5                                 ^■1



rd
ffi




        4J                 O
        CJ
  CO    O
        s-i
                          c-i’d       on
  O     d
£       W
«H
        d
 o
 <D     8
  P
 •P
  co
        S-i
        O
        d
 "Hb
        S
 W      o
        *
 a
   o
 , IH   s
        d
        o
   4>   JO
   d    CO
  o     ,P
         o
 JO      o
  <U     H    <D d>
  d      P
  «     <     a‘a       o a s d
  c_>         o 8          &> fl -d
        13    Tj co
  u           c-. .22
 •d
   CO
        *G    o w
  <U    "•M
         3)             '•3 2
   sO    CO    d 73               20
         o
  Q     pH    m S

< C □
                        Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle       293




Notes

 1 Bohlken, H. (1962). Probleme der Merkmalsbewertung am Saugetier-
    schadel, dargestellt am Beispiel des Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827, Morph,
   jfahrbuch, 103 (4), pp. 509-661.
 2 Kurten, B. (1955). Sex dimorphism and size trends in the cave bear, Acta
   Zool. Fennica, 90, p. 48; Simpson, G. G., Roe, A. and Lewontin, R. C.
    {i960).Quantitative Zoology. (2nd ed.). New York.
 3 Simpson, G. G., Roe, A. and Lewontin, R. C. (i960), op. cit. p. 114.
 4 Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Bur-
    gaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).
 5 Degerbpl, M. (1945). The bison in Denmark, Danmarks Geol. Unders.,
    2 73, pp. 1-62.
 6 Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). ibid.
 7 Riitimeyer, I. (1867). Versuch einer natiirlichen Geschichte des Rindes
    in seinen Beziehungen zu den Wiederkauern in allgemein, N. Denk.
    Allgem. Schweiz. Ges. ges. Naturwiss., 22 (2), pp. 1-176.
 8 Hitscher, K. (1888). Untersuchungen von Schadeln der Gattung Bos,
    unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung einigerin ostpreussischen Torfmooren
    gefunderer Rinderschadel, Diss.Kdnigsberg.
 9 Nehring, A. (1889). Uber Riesen und Zwerge des Bos primigenius,
    Sitzungsber. Ges. naturf. Freunde Berlin, pp. 5-7.
10 Adametz, L. (1898). Bos (brachyceros) Europaeus n. sp. (Resume), Bull,
    int. Acad. Sci. Cracowie, pp. 88-103.
11 La Baume, W. (1909). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der fossilen und sub-
    fossilen Boviden, Schrift. naturf. Ges. Danzig, 12, pp. 45-80.
12 Malsburg, K. von. (1911). Uber neue Formen des kleinen diluvialen
    Urrindes Bos (urus) minutus n. spec.. Bull. int. Acad. Sci. Cracowie, pp.
    340-8.
13 Hilzheimer, M. (1909). Wisent und Ur im Naturalkabinett zu Stuttgart,
   Jahresheft Vereins, vaterl. Naturk. Wurttemburg, 65, pp. 241-69.
14 Leithner, O. F. (1927). Der Ur, Ber. int. Ges. Erhaltung des Wisents, 2, pp.
    1-140.
15 Jackson, J. W. (1943). Animal bones—1 Neolithic, in Wheeler, R. E. M.
    Maiden Castle, Dorset. London, pp. 360-7.
16 Bilton, L. (1952). The History of the Chillingham Herd of Wild White
    Cattle. M.Sc. Thesis, University of Manchester.
17 Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954). Faunal remains, in Clark, J. G. D.
    Excavations at Star Carr. Cambridge, pp. 70-95.
18 e.g. Piggott, S. (1954). The Neolithic Cultures of the British Isles. Cambridge.
19 Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). The excavation of a Bos
    primigenius at Lowe’s Farm, Littleport, Proc. Camb. Ant. Soc., 54,
    pp. 3-16.
20 Jewell, P. A. (1962). Changes in size and type of cattle from prehistoric to
    medieval times in Britain, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 77, pp. 159-67.
21 Grigson, C. In preparation.
22 As defined by Kurten, B. (1955). ibid.
23 Grigson, C. In preparation.
24 Leithner, O. F. (1927). ibid.; Requate, H. (1957). Zur Naturgeschichte
    des Ures {Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827), nach Schadel-und Skelettfunden
    in Schleswig-Holstein, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 70, pp. 297-338.
25 Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954). ibid.; Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs,
    E. S. (1961). ibid.
26 Degerbol, M. (1962). Ur und Hausrind, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 76 (2-3),
    pp. 243-51.
294   Dart H Domestication and exploitation of animals       GRIGSON


      27 Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). ibid.
      28 Berry, R. J., this volume, pp. 207-17.
      29 Berry, R. J. ibid.
      30 Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn und das
         Problem der Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung. 14, pp.
         I75-2I4-
      31 Lydekker, R. (1898). Wild Oxen, Sheep, and Goats of all Lands. London,
         p. 46.
      32 See Berry, R. J. ibid, and Bokonyi, S., this volume, pp. 219-29.
      33 Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). ibid.
      34 Grigson, C. (1966). The animal remains from Fussell’s Lodge long
         barrow, in Ashbee, P. The Fussell’s Lodge Long Barrow Excavations
         1957, Archaeologia C 1966, pp. 63-73.
      35 Grigson, C. (1965). Faunal remains: measurements of bones, horncores,
         antlers and teeth, in Smith, I. F. Windmill Hill and Avebury: Excavations
         by AlexanderKeiller J925-59. Oxford, pp. 145-67.
      36 Jackson, J. W. (1943). ibid.
      37 Jewell, P. A. (1962). ibid.; Grigson, C. (In press). The domestic animals
         of the earliest neolithic in Britain, in Schwabedissen, H. Die Anfange des
         Neolithikums vom Orient bis Nordeuropa.
      38 Nobis, G. (1962). Die Tierreste prahistorischer Siedlungen aus dem
         Satrupholmer Moor (Schleswig-Holstein), Z. Tierzilcht. ZuchtBiol., 77,
         pp. 16-30.
      39 Nobis, G. (i954)- Zur Kenntnis der ur- und fruhgeschichtlichen Rinder
         Nord- und Mitteldeutschlands, Z. Tierzilcht. ZuchtBiol., 63, pp. 155-94.
      40 Degerbpl, M. (1939). Dyreknegler, in Mathiassen, T. Bunds0 en yngre
         Stenalders Boplads paa Als, Aarboger for Nordisk Old kundighed og
         Historie 1939, pp. 85-198; Grigson, C. (In press), ibid.
      SEBASTIAN PAYNE

      A metrical distinction between sheep and goat
      metacarpals

The osteological separation between sheep and goats presents considerable
difficulties: thus Reed1 writes, “The greatest obstacle to an analysis of the
origin and spread of prehistoric sheep and goats is my complete disbelief in
the validity of most of the published identifications.” In order to be fully
useful, a method for the separation of sheep and goat bones should satisfy
four conditions:

1 The relevant part of the skeleton should occur with reasonable frequency
  in archaeological contexts.
2 The relevant part of the skeleton should not, per se, be likely to present a
  biased figure for the relative proportions of the two animals: horn-cores,
  for example, are often used, but some of the sheep or goats, especially the
  females, may well be hornless, and the horn-cores of the animals differ so
  much (not only in shape, but also in structure and in size) that their
  resistance to destruction must surely also differ considerably: any figure
  thus obtained must therefore be treated with caution.
3 The separation obtained should be clear, demonstrable, and easily repro¬
  duced by different observers; ideally, therefore, the difference on which it
  is based should be capable of measurement.
4 The distinction should be able to be applied to immature as well as to adult
  bones.

   It is not however necessary that such a method should separate all sheep
from all goats. All that is needed is a way in which the sheep and goat bones
at any one site can be separated into two discrete groups, with a low propor¬
tion of intermediate specimens.
   In this paper a method is described which, it is hoped, goes some way
towards filling this need, using the ratio between two measurements on each
distal metacarpal condyle: this fragment occurs very frequently on most sites.




11— DOPAA   *   *
296   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals        PAYNE




      The method
Two measurements are taken on any distal metacarpal condyle (Fig. 1): the
medio-lateral width of the condyle (W. cond.), and the antero-posterior
width of its external trochlea (W. troch.). The first measurement cannot be
taken accurately unless one arm of the callipers is narrow enough to fit
between the two condyles, if both are present. Replicate measurements from


                                        1   \
                                    1       t
                                    /       1




                                                            W.tpoch,


               1. Lateral view
                                                w, troch.


                                                              w, cond




                                                 1
                                                 l




                                                             W, cond



             Fig 1 Distal metacarpal, showing the measurements.


 the same series of metacarpals taken by the same observer, and by different
 observers, have given results consistent to within 03 mm. These two measure¬
 ments are then plotted against each other for all the available distal meta¬
 carpal condyles. The medial condyle is normally larger than the lateral
 condyle, and the ratio W. cond. : W. troch. tends to be higher in the medial
 condyle: for this reason, different symbols are used for the medial condyles
                      A metrical distinction between sheep and goat metacarpals   297

    (triangles), and the lateral condyles (squares), whenever they can be dis¬
    tinguished. Similarly, fused and unfused condyles are differentiated in the
    plots.



             Excavated samples

    Results are presented for samples of metacarpals taken from five archae¬
    ological sites. In each case the same conventions are observed. In the first
    four plots (Figs. 2-5) two clusters can be seen. The samples are admittedly
    small, and the appearance of clustering may be exaggerated by the fact that a
    single animal may be represented by as many as four symbols. If, however,
    these clusters have any significance, and in at least one case (the sample from
    neolithic Nea Nikomedeia, Fig. 2), this seems a safe conclusion, a number of
    alternative explanations are available:

    (a) That they represent different age-groups of a single population. This
       seems unlikely, especially as both groups contain immature (unfused)
       individuals.
•   (b) That they represent different sex-groups of a single population. This
       seems unlikely, first because the relative positions of the groups are not
       similar in the four examples, and secondly because a small sample of
       modern sheep and goats of known sex showed no similar sexual dimorph¬
       ism.
    (c) That they represent two separate populations, either of the same, or of
       different species.

      The last seems to be the most reasonable explanation on the basis of the
    available data. As both sheep and goat seem to be present, using other
    accepted criteria, especially the shape of the horn-cores, and the skull sutures,
    the two clusters can probably be identified as sheep and goats. An obvious
    test is to examine a modern sample of sheep and goats, to see whether they
    show the same difference.



             A modern sample

    A sample of modern sheep and goats of known identity was collected by Mr.
    E. S. Higgs in 1963 inVerroia,a town in northern Greece near the site of Nea
    Nikomedeia, about fifty miles west of Thessaloniki. The plots for the meta¬
    carpals in this sample (Figs. 6-7) show a clear difference between sheep
    and goats: there is no clear separation into two discrete clusters, but there is
    no overlap between them either. This result confirms the earlier conclusion,
    that the two clusters in the excavated samples are to be identified as sheep and
    goats.
cTi        o.                                         CO   o       **•
      o.   o                                                         o.



                Fig 2 Metacarpal sample. Nea Nikomedeia, Greece. Neolithic.
E   E
        Fig 3 Metacarpal sample. Meare, England. Iron Age.
Fig 4 Metacarpal sample. Wandlebury, England. Iron Age.
                                                              o.
                            T

                                                    oj-a
                                                    V,   Oi




                                                    sSr^
                                                   ’T= -5?
                                                    o Jj;     o
                                                    ~s        <o
                                                   -S215
                                                    -Q C-


                                                    £s
                                                    4 a




                                                                   Fig 5 Metacarpal sample. Samaria, Crete. Recent.
          ◄


                  ◄


              ◄

                      ◄ ◄



          ◄
                                ◄
              ◄

                                    •<

                                         4




                                             o                o.
o    O                                       <r»              oo
CO   CM
                                                   WUTipOJVAft
Fig 6 Right metacarpals. Verroia, Greece. Modern sample.
Fig 7 Left metacarpals. Verroia, Greece. Modern sample.
Fig 8 Metacarpal sample. Denney Abbey, England. Mediaeval.
                A metrical distinction between sheep and goat metacarpals          305



      Conclusions

It is important to stress that it is not suggested that a diagnostic ratio, based on
these two measurements, can be used to identify every individual sheep/goat
distal metacarpal condyle. All that is claimed is that if this method is applied
to the sheep/goat metacarpals from a reasonably homogeneous archaeological
context, the sheep and the goats, if both are present, are likely to form two
distinct clusters, and can thus be identified. It is likely that, if a sample is large
enough, there will be some intermediate specimens; what is important is that
the bulk of material will fall into two distinct clusters. If only one species is
present, only one cluster is expected: in a sample from an English mediaeval
site (Fig. 8), a single cluster is observed: if a diagnostic ratio is used, on the
basis of the modern sample, to separate the sheep from the goats, it might be
concluded that a few of the bones are of goats (as is shown by the line drawn
in the figure), but it seems more reasonable to interpret the cluster as a single
population of sheep, and this is historically not improbable.
  This method is presented here, in an unfinished state, in the hope that it
can be put to the test on a wider range of material than has yet been available.
The author would be grateful to see the results of any attempt to apply it3.



      Notes
       1 in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960). Prehistoric investigations in
         Iraqi Kurdistan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilisation, Oriental Institute,
         Chicago, 31, pp. 1-184.
       2 The author wishes to thank Miss Fiona Gilmore for allowing him to
         examine material from Meare, and Mr. E. S. Higgs for providing material
         from Wandlebury, Denney Abbey and modern comparative material from
         Verroia. The work was done as part of the British Academy-Cambridge
         University Early History of Agriculture Project; the author especially
         wishes to thank its Director, Mr. E. S. Higgs, for help and encouragement.
      H. S. SMITH

      Animal domestication and animal cult in
      dynastic Egypt

 The writer is not a prehistorian, and has no specialist knowledge of animals,
 even from the purely antiquarian point of view. He was asked merely as a
general egyptologist to suggest the relevance of dynastic Egyptian evidence
to the problems of animal domestication in the ancient world. It follows that
 this short paper is highly eclectic, and that it has no claim to independent
worth, being based entirely on the work of others. It does not present more
than a small part of the evidence from Egypt which is important to this
 subject.
    Scientific study of the beginnings of animal domestication in the Nile
valley has not advanced far, though as the result of the Nubian campaign
some teams of prehistorians have begun to interest themselves specifically in
the subject. In general, however, largely owing to the lack of well-excavated
predynastic settlement sites in the alluvium, such anatomical material as we
have from earlier work may well be marginal to the main problems, and as
much of it was excavated forty years or more ago, identifications doubtless
leave much to be desired. Moreover the culture contexts in which these
specimens were found are not dated on an absolute time scale, and even their
relative dating may be disputed in some cases. As there is at present no means
of judging how far the desert edge sites from which these specimens come
represent the level of achievement in the valley, it seems best at present not to
propose on inadequate evidence an account of the early history of domestica¬
tion there, which may only mislead.
   Dynastic Egypt, however, throws a few side-lights on the state of domesti¬
cation and various forms of animal-keeping in a particular sophisticated urban
culture, that may be of some value for purposes of comparison. Scientific
study of the magnificent Egyptian portrayals of animals in sculpture, relief
and painting, is in the first place the work of two men, Schweinfurth and
Keimer, and this work has been principally devoted to identification of
species, often a delicate matter, rather than to the specific study of domestica¬
tion. The field is too vast for any summary here, and the author is incom¬
petent by training to make it. Animal domestication may have been as
308   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    smith


specialized in the ancient world as in the modern. In the third and second
millennia b.c. in Egypt, the bull preferred for sacrifice and for the table was
called iwz; exceedingly fat with pendulous belly, it stood relatively low on its
haunches, and had wide everted horns, which however were often deliberately
twisted asymmetrically or even removed during youth. Texts suggest that
these bulls were normally imported from the south, perhaps mainly from the
Dongola bend and adjacent territories. On arrival by river in Egypt, these
animals were kept tethered in stables or fenced paddocks under constant
surveillance; there they were fattened methodically for slaughter. The native
wild bull of the Delta marshes and the hill country bordering the valley, the
Egyptians called ng', it is depicted as lean and standing relatively high on its
haunches, with wide everted horns like those of the iwz, which are, however,
never deformed or removed. The ng was captured by lassooing, and once
tamed, appears to have been allowed to graze freely, being caught for service
by use of sticks and the lassoo. It was the draught animal par excellence used
for pulling the plough, stone blocks, funeral sarcophagi, etc. The Egyptians
bred from the females, and also naturally used them for milking, whereas in
the case of the iwz, females do not seem to be often represented and breeding
in Egypt was probably less common. The ng was in the natural course of
events also used for sacrifices and killed for meat (usually, one suspects,
animals that had done good service), but was never apparently deliberately
fattened. The cult animal of the bull-god Apis was a ng', probably this is true
also of other bull-gods, but is not demonstrable1.
  Perhaps the most remarkable case of over-specialization is that of a particu¬
lar race of fat-tailed sheep in which, Herodotus (III, 113) tells us, the tail
became so heavy that the sheep was unable to drag it about without serious
difficulty and consequent ulceration; so the shepherds supported the tail on a
wheeled trailer drawn by reins. This apparent fantasy has been shown to be
literal truth by Keimer, who has traced a series of references in Arabic and
European sources to these sheep from the mediaeval period to the last century,
and discovered that the trailer was still used in the Menufiyah province of the
Delta in recent times2. The fat-tailed woolly sheep, Ovis platyra, with horns
curved down and forward, was introduced in the Middle Kingdom, and lived
for a short time side by side with the ancient Egyptian fleeceless sheep, O
longipes, which, however, became extinct by the early New Kingdom.
O. longipes had laterally-twisted horns almost parallel to the ground, and it is
with these horns that the ram-headed deities Khnum and Amun and Herishef
are always shown. When in the later period incarnation animals were required,
these had to be culled from O. platyra, but the mummies of these animals
show that they were provided with a gilded wooden crown in the form of the
horizontally-twisted horns of O. longipes, so as to maintain the original
sacred appearance of the deity. In the particular case of the ram god of
Mendes in the Delta there is evidence to show that for a time a species of goat
                 Animal domestication and animal cult in dynastic Egypt    309

with horns similar in shape to O. longipes was used for incarnation animal^
but subsequently O. platyra was used here too3.
   That the third millennium was a time when the Egyptians were making
experiments with the surrounding fauna is shown by the scenes of feeding
tethered animals in fenced paddocks already referred to; for ibex, oryx,
antelope, addax, gazelle, and hyaena are shown being fed in the same paddock
with iwz bulls4. In the first three cases the motive is clearly fattening for
sacrifice, but the case of the hyaenas, who had to be forcibly fed (Fig. 1), is




Fig 1 The forcible feeding of a hyaena (Tomb of Kagemni at Saqqara (Dyn.
     VI)).


strange, for they do not normally seem to appear in offering scenes or lists5,
and there is no evidence that scavengers formed part of the Egyptian diet
except in time of famine, nor do they figure in cult. Another example is that
of cranes, who are shown in the bird-pens of nobles’ estates being forcibly
fed (Plate ii)6. Such scenes do not recur after the Old Kingdom. While the
keeping and forcible feeding of animals cannot of course be equated with
domestication for use, some of the same processes are involved. We should
310   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals      smith


perhaps then examine prehistoric material for signs of incipient or experi¬
mental utilization of species which never became fully domesticated. In this
connection reference should be made to the camel, which as is well-known
does not appear among the dynastic fauna of Egypt until the Roman period.
There are, however, indubitable representations of the camel from the
predynastic period, and one most remarkable theriomorphic vase in the
form of a camel from an allegedly intact tomb at Abusir el-Meleq, which
contains a (to me) disconcertingly wide range of material, but may date from
the First Dynasty7. None of this proves early use of the camel, but a terracotta
plaque bought by Schiaparelli from a Luxor dealer in 1904 and believed to
come from a predynastic cemetery north of Qurneh which was being looted
at that date, shows what is certainly a camel being led by one man and
ridden by a second. It is unfortunate that the credentials of this object are so
poor, for if genuine it might show that the camel was known and to some
extent used in the deserts bordering the Nile at an early period, but was not
introduced into the valley either because of its eating habits or lack of
human control until three millennia later8.
  The special form of animal keeping for which Egypt is famous, the lodge¬
ment of particular divinely selected animals in temples to act as the incarna¬
tion of a god, raises particular problems. In the case of the bull Apis, the
incarnation of Ptah, the animal was selected by means of special divine
markings, and on the death of its predecessor it was installed in a stall next
to the Ptah temple at Memphis with nation-wide pomp and rejoicing. The
bull was fed by the offerings of the King and the faithful, and was allowed to
lead a normal sexual life; in the latest period its cow-mother and its calves
were also sacred. On ceremonial occasions the animal, heavily garlanded and
adorned with insignia, was led out in procession, when prayers and requests
for oracles were made to him. On death he was embalmed and buried with
full royal honours at ceremonies attended by priestly representatives from all
Egypt, an occasion of national mourning. Actual burials so far discovered
date back only to the sixteenth century b.c., but what are almost certainly
representations of Apis bulls go back at least to the First Dynasty (c. 3000
B.c.)9. Other species probably attested as incarnation animals at this early date
are ibis, hawk, baboon and a member of the canids; the fact that other species
are not attested until later is not necessarily significant. But the existence of a
cult of an animal god does not even in late times predicate the existence of an
incarnation animal; in the case of savage species statues were always used for
cult purposes. Evidently the practical measures necessary to keep an animal in
good health in captivity for cult purposes are similar to those required for
domestication for use.
  In Table I are listed some important Egyptian genera, selected on
an arbitrary basis, with details of their utilization by the Egyptians for
sport, offering and sacrifice, domestication, as pets and as cult animals. This
table, of course, drastically over-simplifies the complexity of the phenomena,
                 Animal domestication and animal cult in dynastic Egypt     311

ignoring species, date, tabu and other important considerations. It does serve
to show, however, that the group of animals worshipped in Egypt has (i) no
direct relation with the group of domesticated animals; (ii) no direct relation
with the group of animals favoured for offerings and sacrifices in tomb or
temple cult. Most genera hunted by the king and the nobility in the Old
Kingdom for sport recur among those worshipped; it is notable that some
forms of such hunting and harpooning continued to be represented long after
they had passed out of practice, because they signified ritually the victory of
the king over his enemies, or in mythical terms of Horus over Seth
(Typhon)10. Many genera not in this group were of course worshipped.
Most of them were, however, wild, while those common domesticated fauna
of Egypt, the goat, the pig, the donkey and the duck were never associated
with cults.
  In view of this, it might seem that any connection between the keeping of
animals for cult purposes and domestication for use might be ruled out. Yet
I doubt whether the possibility can be dismissed so lightly. As seen above,
many of the fauna worshipped belong to the uplands or were the object of
hunting. The German school of historians of religion led by H. Kees has
made it probable, by careful study of individual cults and their mythology,
that behind even some of the cults which seem most closely connected with
domesticated animals and the agricultural fife of the valley, there stand pre¬
cursors belonging to an earlier stage of the economy. For instance, in dynastic
times the cult of Min of Coptos, who appears both as a white bull and as an
ithyphallic anthropomorphic deity, is concerned almost entirely with the
fertility of the crops and herds; yet certain titles and strands of myth appear
to show that originally Min in the form of a rampaging wild bull was lord of
the eastern desert. Likewise, there are indications that the anthropomorphic
female deities of the first cataract, Anukis and Satis, were originally a dorcas
gazelle and an oryx respectively. Certain bull and cow cults appear also to
have originally been addressed to wild species, and the object of one cult, the
baboon, Papio hamadryas, appears to have been extinct in Egypt by the third
millennium b.c. One important deity, Seth, the god of storm and desert, is
represented by a strange mythical animal, unknown among five and fossil
fauna, which yet may represent some of the traits of okapi or aardvark. It
seems possible that this representation may be a stylization of some creature or
a cross between creatures once known to predynastic Egyptians or a strain of
them, at a time when they lived in the deserts of North Africa, or indeed
elsewhere. Kees in fact sees the history of animal-cult in predynastic Egypt as
a gradual adaptation of cults which had originated among people hunting,
gathering, fowling, fishing and grazing over a wide area, to the changed
circumstances of intensive agricultural life in the valley dependent on the
Nile flood. This system of interpretation is far from proven, but there is a
considerable body of textual and iconographical evidence to support it, and it
is of course welcomed by the considerable body of religious historians who
312   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals               smith



                       Hunted
                         by                               Kept
                       Royalty      Kept     Offered     as pets               Object
                        and          for       or         or in    Domesti¬      of
       Genus           Nobility   fattening Sacrificed   gardens    cated       cults    Notes


Lion                      X          -          -           -          -             X
Baboon                    -          -          -           —          —             X     a
Monkey                    -          -                      X          —                   b
Oryx (antelope)           X          X          X           —                    *          c
Addax (antelope)          X          X          X           ~          —                    c
Buffalo                   X          X          X           —                               c
                          X          X          X                      —             >    c, d
Gazelle
Ibex                      X          -          -           —          —             —
Fallow Deer               X          -          -           —          —             -
Hyaena                    “          X          >
Wild Dogs (Wolf,
   Jackal)                -          -          —           —                        X     e
Fox                       -          -          -                      —             —     f
Domestic Dog              -          -          -           X          X             —
Cattle: iwz               -           X          X          -          X             X
Cattle: ng                X          -           X          -          X             X
Sheep                     -          -           -          -          X             X
Goat                      -          -           -          -          X             —     g
Pig                       -          -           -          -          X             -     h
Horse                     -          -           -          —          X             —
Donkey                    -          -           -          -          X             -     h
Cat                       -          -           -          X          X             X     i
Hare                      X          -           X          -          -             X
Mongoose                  -          -           -          -          -             X
Hippopotamus              X          -           -          -          -             X     j
Crocodile                  X         -           -          -          -             X     i
Fish (Lepidotus)           -         -           -          -          -             X     k
Fish (Oxyrhynchus)         -         -           -          -          -             X     k
Frog                       -         -           -          -          -             X
Vulture                    -         -           -          -          -             X
Falcon                     -         -           -          -           ?            X     l
Kite                       -          -          -          -          -             -     m
Crane                      -          X          -          -          -             -
 Stork                     -          -          -          X          -                    n
Heron                      -          -          -          -          -             X
 Ibis                      -          -          -          -          -             X      0
 Goose                     -          -          X          -          X             X      p
 Duck                      -          -          X          -          X         A"
 Ostrich                   X          -          -          -          -          -

general.    Phenomena are very much more complex than shown in this chart. In particular
the related factor of tabu is omitted, species are not distinguished, and date of introduction
and of first attestation of cult are left out of consideration.

  (a) No longer native in Egypt during dynastic period.
  (b) The baboon is shown adoring the sun at dawn, but had no cult of its own.
  (c) These animals were considered (at least from the New Kingdom) as “Typhonian”, and
      were in the context of royal rituals sacrificed as enemies.
  (d) No cult in dynastic times: some inferential evidence for predynastic cults.
  (e) Wepwawet of Siut, appears on early monuments erect and armed. Elsewhere the
      wolf/dog occurs prone on a shrine, typically as necropolis god and embalmer of
      Osiris (Anubis).
  (/) A human figure disguised as a fox appears playing the flute on a predynastic hunting
      palette: it is suggested that it may be a decoy.
  (g) No original goat cults: through similarity of the horns to Ovis longipes the goat was for a
      time after the extinction of this species substituted for it in the cult of the ram of
      Mendes.
                   Animal domestication and animal cult in dynastic Egypt                 313

believe that animal and plant cults belong to an earlier stage of religious
development than anthropomorphic cults11.
  If Kees is right, animal cults of some sort must have existed among the
inhabitants of north-east Africa before the main “neolithic revolution” and
before the intensive agricultural settlement of the Nile valley. It follows that
they were in being during the times in which animals were being domesti¬
cated for use. Of course there is nothing to show that at that early time special
incarnation animals were kept and fed; however, as the main point of animal
cult of this sort appears to be that the powerful numen to be propitiated or
appeased was felt to be manifest in the animal, the possibility that man
attempted from the first to approach the spirit through the living exemplar
cannot be ruled out. And if so the means he used would be very much those
used in the process of domestication.
  The most that can be said for the above tendentious argument is that it
points one more of the factors that could have played a part in the keeping or
domestication of particular species in a particular culture-context. For while
it is certainly right and necessary to regard the whole process of the domesti¬
cation of animals as an evolutionary event, that “event” is surely the sum of
many particular historical occurrences, which may well have been due to
individual combinations of cultural and environmental causes.



      Notes
       1 Montet, P. (1954). Les boeufs Egyptiens, Kemi, 13, pp. 42-58.
       2 Keimer, L. (1953-4). Notes diverses, Bull, de Vlnstitut d'Egypte, 36
         pp.466-76.
       3 Keimer, L. (1938). Remarques sur quelques representations de beliers,
         Annales du Service des Antiquites d’Egypte, 38, pp. 297-332; Zeuner,
         F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, p. 184 and Fig.


  (h) These animals were considered “Typhonian”, but were normally avoided even for
       sacrifices: eating them was tabued.
  (i) The early African cat may have been used for retrieving, but the evidence is difficult to
       interpret. This species died out after the Middle Kingdom: the domestic cat of the
       New Kingdom replaces some lionesses in cult, e.g. Bastet.
  (;') Considered “Typhonian”. Crocodile hunting not shown after the Old Kingdom.
       Hippopotamus-hunting scenes occur in the context of royal ritual to the latest period
       but can hardly have taken place after the Middle Kingdom.
  (k) Considered “Typhonian”. Generally fished for and eaten, but tabu in the context of
       certain festivals and certain local cults.
  (/) There is some evidence for falconry in ancient Egypt, see Keimer, L. (1950). Falconry
       in ancient Egypt, Isis, 41, p. 52.
  (ni) The sisters Isis and Nepthys as mourners for Osiris appear as kites, but there is no cult
       of the bird.
  (n) Kept in royal gardens as exotic specimens.
  (o) Is cult-incarnation of the same god, Thoth (the moon), as baboon.
  Cp) The goose plays a role in the myths of creation, and is identified with Amun, but the
       existence of a cult is dubious.

Table 1 Utilization of selected genera in dynastic period.
314   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals         smith


         7.17, corrects an error in his chapter (1954). Domestication of animals,
         in Singer, C. et al. (eds.) A History of Technology. Oxford, pp. 345-6 and
         Fig. 222.
       4 Zeuner, F. E. (1954). °P- cit. p. 341 and Fig. 220; see also von Bissing, K.
         (1905). Die Mastaba des Gem-ni-kai, 1, Berlin, pi. XI; see also Keimer, L.
         (1956). Notes de lecture, Bull, de Tlnstitut Francais d’Archeologie Orientale,
         55> PP- 13-20.
       5 The hyaena is found once in an Old Kingdom mortuary offering scene. A
         hyaena is seen in the hunting scenes of the Pyramid temple of Sahure being
         tackled by a dog, and they are occasionally seen led to and from the
         hunting field. A suggestion that they were used as decoys has no direct
         support.
       6 Duell, P. (1938). The Mastaba of Mereruka, 1. Chicago, pi. 52.
       7 Moller, G. and Scharff, A. (1926). Die Archaeologischen Ergebnisse des
          Vorgeschichtliches Graberfeldes von Abusir el-Meleq, 209. Berlin, pp. 40-1
         and pi. 24.
       8 Keimer, L. (1929). Bermerkungen und Lesefriichte zur altagyptischen
         Naturgeschichte, Kemi, 2, pp. 85-90.
       9 Otto, E. (1964). Beitrage zur Geschichte der Stierkulte in Aegypten.
         Hildesheim. An ivory from the Hierakonpolis deposit in the Petrie
         Collection, University College London, has recently been cleaned, and
         has proved to show a bull with a disk between the horns, probably Apis
         or Mnevis.
      10 Save-Sodebergh, T. (1953). Egyptian Representations of Hippopotamus
         Hunting as a Religious Motive. Uppsala.
      11 Kees, H. (1956). Der Gbtterglav.be im alten Agypten. Berlin. Especially the
         first chapter.
Part III: Regional and local evidence for domestication
      F. R. ALLCHIN

      Early domestic animals in India and Pakistan


Considering that the Archaeological Survey of India recently celebrated its
centenary, and that in the past two decades there has been such a spate of
excavations, the available archaeological evidence bearing on the domestica¬
tion of animals in the subcontinent is regrettably sparse (see map, p. 324).
Before 1947 scarcely any excavation reports thought fit to mention animal
remains. The work of Sewell and Guha for Mohenjo-daro (1931)1, and
Prasad for Harappa (1936)2 were happy exceptions. Since 1950 a growing
number of reports has appeared in which at least some reference to animal
remains is made. The principal published data relates to the excavations at
Hastinapur (1950-2)3, Piklihal (1952)4, Maheshwar (1952-3)5, Rangpur
(1953-6)6, Maski (1954)7, Mundigak (1951-8)8, Nevasa (1954-6)9, Utnur
(1957)10,     Langhnaj (1944-63)11. There is further a considerable volume
of hitherto unpublished material relating to other excavations. In some
instances the scale of the excavations, or the quantity of animal remains
discovered, were such that their potential usefulness is limited. Further, some
of the reports provide little more than bare identifications of species, and the
number giving attention to other matters, such as the changes brought about
by domestication, is still very small. One of the upshots of this note is to
point to the need for national centres where animal remains can be preserved
and made available for study. One fears that in the past the field archaeologist
often did not trouble to collect animal remains; but cases have certainly
occurred in which he did so, only to find that they were later disposed of by
the custodian in whose care they were placed. Finally it may well be that
small collections have been retained, but their whereabouts have ceased to be
generally known. My aim in this note is to draw attention to the potential
interest of this subject, and to suggest some of the problems which are ripe for
consideration.
  The first problem must be to discover what animals were utilized at
different periods and what was the history of each species. A second problem
would seem to involve the origin of each domestic species, and whether it was
introduced from outside in an already domesticated condition, or was
locally domesticated from indigenous wild species. A third problem would
318   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    allchin


be to find out what changes, if any, were consequent upon domestication.
And a fourth general problem would concern the utilization of different
species, for food, traction, etc., at various periods.
  For the general history of domestic species in India the data available are
still so slight that there is a serious danger of misinterpreting them. It is
known that the final stage of the stone age, now generally referred to as the
late stone age, persisted in certain refuge areas until very recent times. Proof
has however been lacking that its origin was in absolute time anterior to the
arrival of the first food-producing communities even if this has been generally
accepted as a working hypothesis. Recently a number of excavations of late
stone age caves or rock shelters have been made, and one, at Adamgarh in
Hoshangabad district, has produced a radiocarbon date suggestively earlier
than those of any neolithic sites so far known in India and Pakistan12. Peculiar
interest now centres upon this and other such sites, because among the
animal remains are several species, some of which were potentially domestic.
At Langhnaj these include a canid, a pig (Sus cristatus), buffalo and perhaps
another species of bovine13; and at Adamgarh dog, Bos indicus, buffalo, sheep,
goat, and pig are reported14. It is clearly a matter of great interest to examine
such sites carefully with a view to discovering the sequence in which these
species appear in the sections, and to obtain absolute dates. The publication
of the report on Adamgarh is eagerly awaited. The first appearance of domes¬
tic species in more orthodox “neolithic” contexts is only slightly better known.
It appears that in Baluchistan and adjacent areas bones of cattle, sheep and
goat occur during the first stage of settlement, the stage of semi-permanent
camping sites represented by the lowest levels of Rana Ghundai, Kili Ghul
Mohammad, Mundigak, etc. A single radiocarbon date from Kili Ghul
Mohammad suggests that this period comes to an end around the middle
of the fourth millennium. It is inferred that the cattle were mainly of the
humped zebu variety, as terracotta figurines both during this and subsequent
periods in this area almost always show cattle with a prominent hump. So
far there is very little if any anatomical information about remains from any
of these sites. Chronologically the next earliest information comes from far
to the south at Utnur where a largely pastoral people kept cattle, sheep and
goats during the last quarter of the third millennium B.c. With the civilization
of the Indus plains much more information is available on a whole series of
domestic species. The history of domestication in India and Pakistan is
therefore likely to involve the relationships of two rather separate groups of
peoples, the late stone age hunting and collecting groups, widely scattered
over the whole subcontinent, and perhaps independently taking to domestica¬
tion of certain species; and the groups of largely nomadic pastoralists who
spread from the west, probably as the result of population expansion in the
relatively earlier centres of West Asia. These people, if they brought with
them herds of animals, would have been obvious targets for the “hunting”
activities of the earlier inhabitants whom they encountered15.
                            Early domestic animals in India and Pakistan      319

  My second question relates to the origins of the domestic species attested
in early contexts; briefly these include the zebu, buffalo, sheep, goat, pig,
horse, elephant, camel, dog, cat and fowl. The problem of the origin of Bos
indicus is bound up with that of its relationship to Bos primigenius and is really
quite beyond the scope of this paper16. In India and Pakistan (with the single
exception of the Indus civilization) representations in terracotta and painting,
on either rock or pottery, suggest that the former was the universal type of
cattle. Only in Harappan and pre-Harappan contexts in the Indus valley do
we encounter, alongside the zebu, “unicorn” seals and terracotta figurines of
humpless beasts which resemble the primigenius type, and the formula used to
depict them appears to be of Mesopotamian origin17. Further the study of the
animal remains from Harappa, no less than from Utnur, seems to indicate,
whenever diagnostic characters are available, that they belong to humped
cattle18. It is evident that by the end of the third millennium there were
several breeds of Bos indicus widely dispersed. The breed depicted on the
Harappan seals corresponds remarkably with the modern breed in Sindh
and Gujarat, with its heavy build, pronounced dewlap, and shortish simple
curved horns: that depicted in the oldest stratum of rock paintings and in
neolithic terracottas in the southern Deccan was evidently of much lighter
build, with inconspicuous dewlap and long double curved horns, and with a
pronounced hump, and appears to be closer to the modern cattle of Central
India. There is thus a suggestion that such regional varieties are sufficiently
ancient. These things, together with Alur’s observations on medullosis (to
be referred to below) seem to indicate that Bos indicus was already clearly
differentiated from Bos primigenius, and that its domestication must have
been from an indigenous species.
  The relationship of the Indian buffalo (Bos bubalus) to its wild counterpart
leaves little doubt that it was domesticated locally. To this day the buffalo
is regarded as only semi-domestic, and as Watt so well remarked “Few
domestic animals have in fact changed less than the buffalo”. Cross mating
with wild beasts is still common19. This means that there is little likelihood
of clear differentiation of wild or domestic animals, and that the identification
in archaeological assemblages will have to rely on other criteria. There has
not as yet been sufficient study of sheep and goat bones in our contexts to
indicate the nature of the early specimens, but Prasad concluded that the
Harappan sheep could have been locally domesticated from the feral Ovis
vignei20. The position is no clearer with regard to the goat. Prasad also con¬
cluded that the Harappan pig was a domestic version of the Indian wild pig,
Sus cristatus21. Hence here too it may be difficult to determine whether at any
given site the bones of pig are domestic or feral. I am not aware of any study
of the relationship of the two in modem examples. The bones of horse are
clearly those of an imported animal. It can be agreed with Zeuner that the
teeth obtained by Ross from the surface of the section of Rana Ghundai I
should be regarded with suspicion, and that in any case they are more likely
320   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    allchin

to be those of the onager, Equus hemionus22. The earliest clear evidence comes
from a late level at Mohenjo-daro, and terracotta figurines from Harappan
contexts are at best equivocal. A recent find of horse bones from a site in
Mysore, dated by radiocarbon to c. 1300 b.c. and of equine teeth at a neigh¬
bouring site dated by radiocarbon to c. 1600 b.c.23 is very suggestive; and
need in no way go against the earlier view associating the appearance of the
horse in the subcontinent with the arrival of Indo-Iranian speaking peoples.
There is still no proof that the bones of elephant found in Harappan and
later sites are those of domesticated beasts, and the nature of breeding and
taming makes it unlikely that they would be easily recognizable if they were.
But it can at least be reasonably affirmed that the domestication at whatever
date took place locally. Indeed the elephant seems to call for special glossing
of the definition of the word “domestication”. The remains of camel at
Harappan sites are surely certain proof that the single humped camel was
domestic24. New and more abundant material is understood to be available
in the recent excavations at Kalibangan25. It may be expected that Camelus
dromedarius formerly existed in a feral state in Sindh and Rajasthan, and that
it was locally domesticated. That the jungle fowl was locally domesticated
seems certain, but more study will be required if its history is to be made
clear. So too is there need for more information about the reported remains of
 cat and dog, and their relations to wild species, such as the jackal or wolf.
    My third major problem has to do with changes which may have arisen as
 a result of domestication. As yet insufficient material is available, or insuffi¬
 cient study has been made, to enable such changes to be described. Some work
 has been done for Bos indicus. Thus Sewell proposed that the complexity
 or simplicity of the enamelling patterns of molars from Mohenjo-daro might
 show by reference to modern domestic (or recently feral) herds evidence of
 progressive change26. He also mentioned progressive reduction of size of
 teeth. Later writers have not adduced further evidence in support of his
 views. More recently Alur (in an as yet unpublished study of material from
 Utnur) has noticed a significant variation in the medullosis of certain bones,
 suggesting that by comparison with those of modern cattle they show a
 relatively earlier evolutionary stage27. Another aspect which deserves closer
 study than it has hitherto had is of progressive reduction of size in succeeding
 periods. Alur’s study of the bones from Utnur revealed the presence, along¬
 side a majority of bones of normal size, of smaller percentages of very large,
 large and even small (though mature) bones, and my own preliminary survey
 of the bones from the excavation revealed a progressive increase in the
 percentages of small animals in succeeding periods28.
    My fourth problem concerns the study of man’s utilization of his domestic
 animals. How neglected this aspect has been can be seen from the fact that so
 far there has been no study of the animal remains from any of the great
 cities of the Ganges valley (except Hastinapur). Thus we are unable to use
 the evidence of archaeology to throw objective light upon the developing
                             Early domestic animals in India and Pakistan        321

food habits of North India during protohistoric or early historic times. The
significance of such a research project is obvious: even though it goes far
beyond the range of domestication as hunted animals, fish and fowl must also
be recorded. Alur has recently confirmed my comment that the many split
bones from Utnur indicated that cattle formed an item of diet at that time.
There is growing evidence of the use of cattle bones for tools. He has also
drawn attention to a somewhat unexpected evidence of utilization of the
Utnur catde. He points out that the anchylosis of the bones of the hock joint
is typical of that occurring in modern draft animals, and must here too indicate
that the cattle were used for heavy draft or weight bearing purposes29. What
these may have been demands attention.
  In conclusion it seems worth repeating that the stage is now set, in this as
in palaeobotanical and other environmental studies, for substantial advances
in our knowledge in both India and Pakistan, provided that suitable centres
for collecting data can be established, and that a few specialists are able to give
their attention to these questions.




      Notes

       1 Sewell, R. B. S. and Guha, B. S. (1931). Being Chapter XXXI of Marshall,
         J. (1931). Mohenjo-daro and the Indus Civilization. London, pp. 649-73.
       2 Prasad, B. (1936). Animal remains from Harappa Memoirs of the Archae¬
         ological Survey of India, 51.
       3 Lai, B. B. (1955). Excavations at Hastinapura, Ancient India, 10 and 11.
       4 Allchin, F. R. (1961). Piklihal Excavations. Hyderabad.
       5 Sankalia, H. D., Subbarao, B. and Deo, S. B. (1958). Excavation at
         Maheshwar and Navdatoli. Baroda.
       6 Rao, S. R. (1963). Excavation at Rangpur, Ancient India 18 and 19.
       7 Thapar, B. K. (1957). Maski 1954. Ancient India 13.
       8 Casal, J.-M. (1961). Fouilles de Mundigak; and Poulain, J. B. (1966).
         Etude de la faune, Bull, de VEcole frangaise de VExtreme Orient. 53,
         pp. H9-35-
       9 Sankalia, H. D. et. al., (i960). From History to Prehistory at Nevasa. Poona.
      10 Allchin, F. R. (1963). Excavations at Utnur, Hyderabad.
      11 Clutton Brock, J. (1965). Excavations at Langhnaj: 1944-63. Pt. II. The
         Fauna. Poona.
      12 Joshi, R. V. (1961). Indian Archaeology a review 1960-61, pp. 12-16 and
         ibid, (in press) “Late Mesolithic culture in Central India”. I am indebted
         to Dr. Joshi for his kind permission to refer to the unpublished paper. I
         understand that the study of the animal remains has been made by Sri
         Bholanath, but that it is also unpublished.
      13 Clutton-Brock, J. (1965). ibid.
      14 Joshi, R. V. (In press), ibid.
      15 My wife and I have discussed the hypothetical relations between the
         earliest “Neolithic” cultural groups and the late stone age inhabitants of
         peninsular India in a paper which is still in press.
      16 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, pp.
         236-40.
      17 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. p. 236. We have discussed the art historical
322   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication         allchin


           aspect in greater detail in Birth of Indian civilization. London (1968). pp.
           306-7.
       18 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. p. 37, and Alur, K. R. in his unpublished study
          of the animal remains from Utnur. Alur expressly mentions the occur¬
          rence of the supraspinous process on a number of thoracic vertebrae.
      19 Watt, G. (1908). The Commercial Products of India. London, pp. 732-3.
      20 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. pp. 51-2.
      21 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. p. 56.
      22 Zeuner, F. E. (1936). op. cit. p. 332.
      23 The sites are Hallur and Sangankal respectively. I am indebted to Dr.
          Nagaraja Rao for the information.
      24 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. pp. 58-9.
      25 Information from Shri B. K. Thapar.
      26 Sewell, R. B. S. and Guha, B. S. (1931). op. cit. pp. 655-8.
      27 Alur, K. R. (Unpublished) 1967. Note on the animal remains from Utnur.
          Professor Alur has recently made a study of remains from a number of
          other excavations of Neolithic-Chalcolithic sites in southern India, and
          reports that similar variations in the medullary cavities of cattle bones
          occur at more than one site.
      28 Allchin, F. R. (1963). op. cit. pp. 62-3.
      29 Alur, K. R. (Unpublished) 1967. ibid.
      F. R. ALLCHIN


      Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan


Until recently the history of early cultivation in the Indian subcontinent
depended entirely upon textual references. During the 1930s reports were
published of plant remains at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa; and in the past
two decades more than twenty excavations of later prehistoric or proto-
historic sites have produced plant materials, now in various stages of publica¬
tion. The aim of this short paper is to present an outline of the picture supplied
by this evidence, to draw attention to the wealth of material in India and
Pakistan (Fig. 1), and to suggest the need for further research, both in the
field and the laboratory. For the purposes of this discussion the Indian sub¬
continent may be divided into three major provinces: a western or Indus
province, roughly corresponding to modern West Pakistan; a southern or
Peninsular province; and a north-eastern or Gangetic province. All the finds
so far reported belong to one or other of these three.



      Western or Indus province

This province includes the great alluvial tracts of the Indus system, and the
upland valleys of Baluchistan. It is throughout an area of low rainfall and
considerable variation of temperature between winter and summer. It is also
that part of the subcontinent in which the earliest evidence of settlements of
cultivators or pastoralists is to be found. The reported plant remains are as
follows:

1 Cereals.   The principal grains so far recorded are wheat and barley, but as
comparatively little excavation has been done the picture is probably far from
complete. At Mundigak (in period II ? late fourth millennium b.c.) grains of
club wheat (Triticum compactum) are reported1. No evidence is yet available
from pre-Harappan levels in the Indus valley, but from the excavated
Harappan sites (c. 2200-1750 b.c.) there is more evidence. Two varieties of
wheat, the club wheat and an Indian dwarf wheat (T. sphaerococcum) are
324   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   allchin




reported, as well as two varieties of barley, a small seeded six rowed variety
(Hordeum vulgare) and a sub-species (H. vulgare var. nudum)2.


2 Leguminous plants.     From the Indus civilization the field pea (Pisum
arvense) is reported3.


3 Oilseeds.    Also from the Harappan civilization two oilseeds are recorded.
From Harappa came a lump of sesamum, a plant whose antiquity in India
may be judged from the fact that it gave its name tila to all kinds of oil {tel,
etc.)4. From Chanhu-daro seeds of mustard, identified as most probably
Brassica juncea were obtained5.


4 Fruits.     Several varieties are reported from Harappan times, and one
from an earlier context. From Mundigak II comes evidence of Zizyphus
                           Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan     325

vulgaris, then probably as now wild or only semi-domestic6. From Harappan
contexts come dates and seeds of melon7.


5 Other crops.   There is evidence that a variety of cotton (Gossypium sp.) was
cultivated in the Indus civilization. Apart from actual fibres surviving in
contact with copper tools and a silver vessel, at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa,
numerous woven textile impressions are reported on faience vessels, etc.8 It
is also reported that the fibres from Mohenjo-daro had been dyed with some
substance, probably a madder. The European madder (Rubia tinctorum) is
still cultivated in Sindh9.



      Southern or peninsular province

This province is comparatively more varied in climate, rainfall in particular
varying between tropical rain and semi-desert precipitation. The evidence is
from recent excavations and much is as yet incompletely published.


1 Cereals.   Early evidence of wheat cultivation is restricted to the north-west
of the province. Both Triticum vulgare and T. compactum have been identified
by Dr. Vishnu Mittre throughout the chalcolithic occupation at Navdatoli
(c. 1800-1200 b.c.)10; and its cultivation seems to have spread towards the
south to occur at Sonegaon towards the end of this period11. The province
produces the earliest evidence so far for rice cultivation. Rice husks and
spikelet impressions on pottery and clay are reported at both Lothal and
Rangpur IIA (that is, probably towards the end of the Harappan period)12.
Rice (Oryza saliva) is again reported in phases II-IV at Navdatoli (c. 1600-
1200 b.c.)13; and spread to the south to appear at Hallur in an early Iron Age
context (c. 900-800 b.c.)14, and yet later in Iron Age graves from the Tamil
coastal plains. Rice husk impressions are not infrequently encountered in
sites of the Gujarat coast during the second millennium          b.c.   (personal
observation), but these have not yet been studied. Rice is further reported at
Kaundinyapur in Maharashtra (c. 500 b.c.)15. From the peninsula comes the
first evidence in India of another important group of cereal crops. At both
Hallur and at Paiyampalli grains of finger millet (Eleusine coracana, ragi) are
reported, in the former case dating to about 1800 b.c.16 Another grain from
Rangpur III (c. 1200 b.c.) has been identified as possibly the bulrush millet
(Pennisetum typhoideum, bdjra)17, and the same millet has been tentatively
identified at Hallux, although in both cases there is a possibility that it may
rather be Paspalum scrobiculatum, kodon18. Firm evidence of both the bulrush
and finger millets, as well as of kodon, comes from Nevasa at the opening
of the Christian era, from where too comes the earliest archaeological occur¬
rence in India of the great millet (Andropogon sorghum), evidently a late
arrival upon the scene19. Kaundinyapur also yields the first evidence of maize
326   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     ALLCHIN


(Zea mays) in the subcontinent, in the form of grain impressions on pottery.
It is not clear from the published sources what is the date of its occurrence,
one source referring it to a house of the Bahmani period (c. fifteenth century
a.d.), another assigning the type of pottery to the eighth to ninth century a.d.20



2 Leguminous plants.     The peninsula also provides the first evidence of the
cultivation of several species of leguminous plants. From Tekkalakota I (c.
1800-1600 b.c.) and Paiyampalli come examples of horse gram (Dolichos
biflorus)21, and from the latter site and from Navdatoli comes green gram
(Phaseolus radiatus)22. Navdatoli yielded a very rich series of plants from its
chalcolithic levels, including black gram (Ph. mungo), lentil {Lens culinaris),
the grass pea {Lathyrus sativus), the field pea {Pisum arvense), and several
other leguminous weeds23. Evidently another late arrival in India was the
chick-pea or cana gram {Cicer arietinum), which first appears in period IV
at Nevasa (third to first century b.c.)24.


3 Oilseeds.    The only early oilseed so far reported in the peninsula is linseed
{Linum usitatissimum) which occurred throughout the occupation at Nav¬
datoli25. That one of its uses may have been to prepare flax may be inferred
from the discovery of spun fibres in a string of beads from a burial at Chandoli
(c. 1400-1200 B.C.)26.


4 Fruits.     The Indian jujube (Zizyphus jujuba, her) is reported at Navdatoli;
and the myrobalan {Phyllanthus emblica, amalaka) at the same site27. Whether
either of these were strictly cultivated is open to doubt. Wood of the date
palm is probably reported at Utnur, and date palm matting impressions also
at Tekkalakota, but no date stones have been reported28. In modern times
the date is cultivated, in the Deccan, rather for its juice which is fermented
to make tadl than for its fruit.


5 Other crops.     The cultivation of cotton in the peninsula is first attested
by the second half of the second millennium at Nevasa, where a thread of
silk and cotton was discovered in a string of beads from a burial29. I have also
recently noticed textile impressions, apparendy of cotton, on a number of
early Iron Age sherds from southern Mysore.




      Northern or Gangetic province

This province coincides with the alluvial plains of the Ganges system. It
witnesses a marked increase in rainfall and corresponding moderation of
winter cold as one moves eastwards to the delta. Although much excavation
has taken place comparatively little plant evidence has so far been reported.
                               Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan   327


1 Cereals.       Only one grain has so far been discovered, rice. At Hastinapur
and at Noh rice is found during the period of the Painted Grey ware (c. 1000-
500 b.c.)30. My own observation suggests that rice husks were frequently
added to pottery of this and the following period in the central Ganges valley.
Rice is again reported at Sonpur (c. 800-600 b.c.)31 and from the western
margins of the delta at Mahisadal and Pandu Rajar Dhibi already before the
arrival of iron (i.e. prior to 700 b.c.)32. The importance or rice for the economy
of North India is evident from the frequent references in later Vedic literature,
from the time of the Yajur Veda Samhita onwards, and by the opening of the
Christian era Susruta distinguishes no less than thirty-nine varieties33.


2 Other crops.       There is as yet no other evidence for other cultivated plants
in this province.


The evidence so far assembled prompts one to form a number of tentative
conclusions both on the plants themselves and on the related subject of their
discovery, study and preservation. As far as I am aware there is no single
centre, or group of centres to which this material may be sent and where it
may be studied and preserved. Dr. Vishnu Mittre of the Birbal Sahni
Institute at Lucknow has been responsible for many of the published identi¬
fications, and it would seem that this centre might well form a national home
for archaeological plant remains of this kind. It is evident that not all field
archaeologists are equally interested in collecting this sort of material, and it
is to be hoped that its considerable importance may become generally
appreciated. A number of the principal grains and plants found in the Indus
province, and even in adjacent parts of the peninsula, appear to have been
first domesticated in West Asia and to have entered South Asia probably
along with the spread of cultivation in subsequent centuries. On the other
hand, Professor Sir Joseph Hutchinson has pointed out to me the probability
that certain of the millets, notably Eleusine and Pennisetum, were first domes¬
ticated in Africa34. It will be interesting to enquire whether they reached the
Indian peninsula by land (in which case it may be expected that traces will be
found in intermediate areas) or by some other route, perhaps by sea. Several
of the plants are almost certainly indigenous. Among those we notice rice,
cotton, sesamum, and Indian mustard. There is regrettably no archaeological
evidence as yet for the antiquity of a number of other important Indian plants,
and it is still necessary to rely upon the evidence afforded by literature.
Among these plants we may cite sugar cane, first mentioned in the Atharva
Veda (before 800 b.c.), and the black pepper (Piper nigrum), for which the
earliest references are in the Apastambha Dharmasutra, probably before 500
b.c. Archaeological evidence is still awaited for a number of other cultivated
plants, for example yams (.surana) for which the earliest literary evidence is
in Caraka (first to second century a.d.). There are, however, as we have seen,
several instances in which evidence so far available appears to support the
12—DOPAA     *   *
328   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    allchin


literary record. For example, respecting the relative lateness of the introduction
of Cicer arietinum, for which the earliest references are in Rdmdyaha Uttara-
kanda Baudhyayana Grhya Sesasiitra, and Susruta samhita (suggesting
collectively dates between the first and fourth centuries a.d.), or of Sorghum
millet, whose earliest references are in Caraka, Bhela and Kasyapa Samhitas
(suggesting collectively a similar range of dates). The new perspectives
provided by archaeology hold out great hopes for a reappraisal of other types
of evidence. It is evident that much useful work could still be done in plotting
the modern dialect names for different species and considering them in a
historical light. Such “linguistic palaeontology” is likely to yield useful
information, now that the chronological dimensions are beginning to appear.




      Notes

       1 Casal, J.-M. (1961). Fomlles de Mundigak. Appendix XIII by R. Porteres,
         Paris, pp. 259-60.
       2 Marshall, J. (1931)- Mohenjo-daro and the Indus civilization. London,
         vol. 2. pp. 587-9; Mackay, E. J. H. (1943). Chanhu-daro excavations. New
         Haven, p. 250; Vats, M. S. (1940). Excavations at Harappa. Delhi, pp.
         466-7.
       3 Mackay, E. J. H. (1943). ibid.; Vats, M. S. (1940). op. cit. p. 467.
       4 Vats, M. S. (1940). ibid.
       5 Mackay, E. J. H. (1943). ibid.
       6 Casal, J.-M. (1961). op. cit. p. 260.
       7 Vats, M. S. (1940). ibid.
       8 Marshall, J. (1931). op. cit. pp. 585-6; Mackay, E. J. H. (1938). Further
         Excavations at Mohenjo-daro. Delhi, pp. 583, 591-4; Vats, M.S. (1940).
         op. cit. p. 466.
       9 Watt, G. (1908). The Commercial Products of India. London, pp. 926-7.
      10 Vishnu Mittre (1961). Plant economy in ancient Navdatoli and
         Maheshwar, Technical reports on archaeological remains, pp. 15-17.
      11 Indian archaeology—a Review, 1964-5.
      12 Rao, S. R. (1963). Excavations at Rangpur, Ancient India, 18 and 19.
         The note on the plant remains is by S. S. Ghosh and Krishna Lai, p. 168.
      13 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 18-19.
      14 Information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao.
      15 Vishnu Mittre (1966). Kaundinyapur plant economy in proto-historic
         and historic times, Palaeobotanist, 15, pp. 152-3.
      16 For Hallur, information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao, and for
         Paiyampalli information by courtesy of Shri S. R. Rao.
      17 Rao, S. R. (1963). op. cit. p. 169.
      18 For Hallur, information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao.
      19 Sankalia, H. D. et al. (i960). From History to Pre-History at Nevasa.
         Poona, pp. 529-30.
      20 Vishnu Mittre (1966). op. cit. pp. 152-6; Vishnu Mittre and Gupta, H. P.
         (1966). Pollen morphological studies of some primitive varieties of maize
         (Zea mays L.) with some remarks on the history of maize in India, Palaeo¬
          botanist, 15, pp. 176-84.
      21 Information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao and Shri S. R. Rao.
      22 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 21-2.
      23 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 20-3.
                       Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan       329


24 Sankalia, H. D. et al. (i960), ibid.
25 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 23-4.
26 Deo, S. B. and Ansari, Z. D. (1965). Chalcolithic Chandoli. Appendix iv,
   by Gulati, A. N. A note on the early history of flax. Poona, pp. 195-201.
27 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 24-5.
28 For Hallur, information from Dr. Nagaraja Rao. The observation for
   Utnur was our own, and has not so far been substantiated by further
   examination of specimens.
29 Gulati, A. N. (1961). A note on the early history of silk in India, Technical
   reports on archaeological remains, pp. 53-9.
30 Lai, B. B. (1955). Excavation at Hastinapura, Ancient India, 10 and 11.
   Appendix J, on plant remains by Chowdhury, K. A., and Ghosh, S. S.
   pp. 120-35; For Noh see Indian Archaeology—a Review, 1963-4, and
   ibid. 1964-5.
31 Indian Archaeology a review, 1960-1, p. 5.
32 For Pandu Rajar Dhibi see Das Gupta, P. C. (1964). Excavations at Pandu
   Rajar Dhibi. Calcutta, p. 14; for Mahisadal see Indian Archaeology—a
   Review, 1963-4.
33 Om Prakash (1961). Food and Drinks in Ancient India. Delhi, pp. 262-3.
34 On the origin of Eleusine coracana see Mehra, K. L. (1963). Considerations
   on the African origin of Eleusine coracana (L), Current Science, 32, p. 300.
■
      J. BURTON-PAGE

      The problem of the introduction of
      Adansonia digitata into India

The subject-matter of this paper relates to a period considerably later than
that of most of the others presented here. But, as an archaeologist working
in a comparatively late historical period, I welcome the opportunity to demon¬
strate that identity of interest, and a fortiori of approach, may occur when
purely historical documents fail. The period primarily concerned, the late
fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries, is well documented for political
history and for the development of religion, and the main features of the
cultural and social institutions of both the autochthones and the foreign
ruling classes are clear. But this documentary evidence can do littie more
than provide a general background to my problem, which seems to have
some connexion with a foreign menial class about whom all information (save
their occasional involvement in political history) is scanty in the extreme.
  The baobab, Adansonia digitata, is commonly “not supposed to be a
native”, says Nairne1, although the family Bombaceae is well represented in
India by other genera. Hooker2 is more specific: the baobab, says he, is “a
native of Africa, not truly wild in India”, and in giving its distribution as
“tropical Africa” he mentions that it is “cultivated in various parts of India
and Ceylon”. But here “cultivated” must be interpreted with caution: the
tree has certainly been planted, as a specimen, in the botanical gardens of
Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, presumably under British direction; and there
seem to have been older plantings around Delhi and Allahabad which may
be attributed to the Mughal taste for curiosa around the end of the sixteenth
century. I can find no other evidence of its deliberate planting in modern
times. We can, however, be a little more precise concerning its Indian
distribution: Birdwood3 notes it as “generally found most abundant about the
old ports frequented by the early Mahommedan traders”, and it has indeed
been reported as growing in and around Janjira, Chaul and Surat, all towns
which would fall into this category. It does however also occur inland: where
it is found in any numbers (apart from the specimen trees already mentioned)
its greatest concentrations appear to be in Bldar and Bijapur in the Deccan;
in Burhanpur in the former principality of Khandesh; and above all in
332   Part III Regional and local evidence of domestication   burton-page




Malwa, in the towns of Chanderi and Mandu and its suburb Na'lcha. All of
these places (see Fig. i) were towns of some importance under the mediaeval
Muslim sultanates.
  The baobab’s onomastic status is suggestive. In Malwa it is known as
Khurasani imli, in Bijapur as Gorakh imli, in both cases taking part of its name
from the Tamarind, the true imli. The confusion is already found in c. 1595
in Abu’l-Fazl’s description of Malwa4: “here the tamarind grows as large as a
coconut, and its fruit is extremely white”. I can imagine no two trees less
likely to be confused from the appearance of stem, leaf or fruit; perhaps the
common feature of a fruit with an acid pulp is responsible for the baobab’s
sobriquet. The epithet Khurasani is fanciful, for the tree is unknown in
Khurasan; it seems to be no more than an elegant word meaning “foreign”,
as in American cloth, Russian salad; and I can find no reason for the Deccan
association with Gorakh (= Goraksanatha, the patron saint of an order of
yogis) unless there may be some association with death, for here the baobab
was traditionally the tree under which executions took place (why ? from its
being merely an easy landmark for a rendezvous, or because its leaflessness
all the year, except for the rains, suggested also lifelessness ?). The tree
cannot be identified in any old Indian flora, and appears to have no Sanskrit
name. Such negative linguistic evidence is of course inconclusive by itself,
                                 The introduction of the baobab into India   333


but it does seem to support the suggestion of an introduction in Islamic
times.
  If, then, we assume that the baobab is an introduced species, the questions
which arise are three: (a) when was it brought in? (b) for what purpose?
(c) by what means ? The date I shall refer to later; but we may observe here
that local tradition in Mandti5 supposes it to have been brought in to the area
under Mahmud Khaljl (1436-69). As to the means, Birdwood suggests
that it was either introduced by traders or carried across the Indian Ocean
by currents and winds, as certainly happened with Kigelia pinnata\ but per¬
haps militating against this latter suggestion is the apparent reluctance of the
baobab to regenerate naturally, even though the fruit germinates readily when
planted. And even if the fruit had arrived on the Indian shore by such an
accident, its transfer some 400 km. inland to the Malwa plateau can only have
been effected by man.
  The last question, for what purpose it was introduced, is more puzzling.
The tree now appears to have little value to man in India (even its natural role
as an inherently comic vegetable seems to be little appreciated), although it
appears somewhat surprisingly6 as one of the possible crude materials of
paper manufacture. I suspect that this happened merely because the tree
happened to be there; in any case if the early fifteenth-century introduction
can be supported, paper-making could not have been the prime purpose on
chronological grounds. I have found no evidence of its hollow trunks being
used as receptacles for water storage, as happens in certain African areas;
and in any case this would seem pointless in such a region as Malwa, where
surface water is not hard to find. Nor is there any evidence, as far as I am
aware, for the use of the hollow trunks for burial purposes, also reported
from parts of Africa. I have seen deer feeding on its fallen petals, but I know
of no instance of the petals being collected as cattle fodder (as with Bombax,
for example), nor yet for use in dyeing, as with a variety of Indian trees.
The only reference to other uses are of its fruits being “made into a refreshing
sherbet by Muslim women” in the Deccan7.
  A clue to its date and an adumbration of its connexion with a particular
class may be forthcoming from the fact that its distribution coincides strikingly
with those areas under Muslim control (Malwa, Khandesh, the Deccan, the
western ports) where Habshls were settled in considerable numbers. The
term Habshi, literally “Abyssinian”, refers in early Islam to slaves of Abys¬
sinian origin, but in India is applied to African slaves of other races, Bantu
and Somali, imported from the Horn of Africa8. The evidence for a total
terrestial correspondence is incomplete, as information is lacking on the
baobab in other Habshl-colonized areas: Bengal, Jawnpur, Ahmadnagar,
Asirgarh. Even so, the coincidence is suggestive, and if we may thus associate
the baobab with the Habshls we are given a terminus a quo: while there is
some evidence for yabshi slaves in north India as early as the beginning of the
thirteenth century, the great period of their expansion all over India was the
334   Part HI Regional and local evidence of domestication     burton-page


fourteenth; for example, the traveller Ibn Battuta9 comments on their presence
from north India to Ceylon on his journeys made between 1333 and 1342,
as guards and men-at-arms on land and sea. There is evidence that they were
in Gujarat in large numbers in the mid-fourteenth century, and well estab¬
lished in the Deccan at the time of Feroz Shah Bahmanl (1397-1422). The
island of Janjira was a Habshl possession from the early sixteenth century,
although Habshls had long before that been prominent in the Muslim navies
on the west coast of India. For Malwa there is no definite evidence of their
presence before the time of Mahmud Khalji, although they are known to
have been employed at the court in his and his son’s reigns to the tune of
thousands. This adds weight to the Mandu tradition reported above.
  If, as seems possible, there is a connection between the baobab and the
Habshls, the African tree and the African people, a powerful reason for the
tree’s introduction is still wanting. A slave people would hardly introduce it
as a specimen to remind them of home; the craving for a “refreshing sherbet”
is hardly convincing, as India is well provided with other natural resources
for such purposes (the modern instance of a powerful Western nation who
have been unable to sustain their existence overseas without a revolting sher¬
bet made from the stimulant coca and cola plants is scarcely an exact parallel;
fourteenth-century transport problems, especially for a slave people, are not
comparable with our own). It does seem possible, however, that its importa¬
tion for a cult purpose might have been permitted. What such a cult purpose
might have been does not seem possible to say; colleagues at the School of
Oriental and African studies concerned with African anthropology have not
yet been able to throw any light on possible baobab cults in east Africa or
along the coast10.
  It is obvious that more work needs to be done on the baobab and its
attendant problems. There has been no investigation of the age of the Indian
baobabs; although I understand that the Indian specimens, imposing though
many of them be, do not approach the African ones in size. More work needs
to be done on defining the distribution of the Indian baobabs. As I have
shown, I fear only too clearly, there is need for more investigation, if the data
are still ascertainable, on the anthropological side.



      Notes

      1 Nairne, A. K. (n.d.). Flowering Plants of Western India. London, s.v.
      2 Hooker, J. D. (1872-5). Flora of British India, 1. London, p. 348.
      3 Birdwood, C. (1886). Communication to Yule, H. (ed.) Hobson-Jobson.
        London, s.v. Monkey-bread tree (this name, however, is not used in
        India).
      4 Abu’l-Fazl (c. 1596). A'in-i Akbari, 2. (ed. Bibl. Ind.). p. 197.
      5 Yazdani, Gh. (1929). Mandu: the City of Joy. Oxford, p. 2.
      6 Watt, G. (1908). Commercial Products of India. London, p. 868.
      7 Cousens, H. (1916). Bijdpur and its Architectural Remains. Bombay, p. 57.
                           The introduction of the baobab into India   335


 8 For their history in India, see Burton-Page, J. (1965). “Habshi”, art, in
   Encyclopaedia of Islam. 2nd edition, 3. pp. 14-16.
 9 Defremery, C. and Sanguinetti, B. R. (1853-8). (eds.) Voyages d’Ibn
   Batouta, 4 (Arabic text and French trans.). Paris, pp. 31, 59-60, 93 and
   185.
10 My thanks are due to Professor P. H. Gulliver and Dr. D. J. Parkin for
   allowing me to pester them with questions of Adansoniology.
      JULIET GLUTTON-BROCK

       Carnivore remains from the excavations of the
      Jericho Tell

The extensive period covered by Dr. K. Kenyon’s1 excavations of the Jericho
Tell from the Mesolithic to the Byzantine provides an exceptionally favour¬
able opportunity for the study of animal remains. It is possible to assess the
composition of the wild faunal assemblage and to trace man’s exploitation
of this fauna and his introduction of exotic domesticated species. Carnivore
remains were found in every main habitation level except the mesolithic and
although specific identification has, in some cases, proved to be difficult, an
analysis of the number of carnivore bones and teeth has enabled assertions
to be made about the relative importance of the several genera that were
present throughout periods of habitation of the site. The absolute numbers2
of remains of each species are shown in Fig. i.
  The carnivore remains can be divided into three main groups, a wolf/jackal/
dog complex, foxes, and cats. These are described in systematic order. A
metrical comparison has been made of the canid remains from Jericho with
those from prehistoric cave sites in Palestine studied by Kurten3.



      Canidae

Canis spp.   Thirty-six bones and teeth of Canis spp. were found dispersed
throughout all levels of the excavations representing thirty-two individual
animals. Three of these specimens were burnt. The remains of Canis consist
mainly of isolated jaws or limb bones but there are four groups of articulated
bones that may be remnants of whole carcases, either purposefully buried or
thrown out on a rubbish pit. One nearly complete skeleton with jaws was
retrieved from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A, and a nearly complete forelimb
from the same period. Another complete limb was found in the Pre-Pottery B,
and a fragmentary skull and articulated long bones from a disturbed area
between the Early and Middle Bronze Age.
  Zeuner4 has said about his preliminary investigation of the canid remains
from the Pre-Pottery and Pottery Neolithic of Jericho that “. . . it is certain
 338     Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   clutton-brock




HO No.




       Neolithic   Neolithic A Neolithic B     Neolithic          Age
  Fig i Absolute numbers (see text note (2)) of carnivore bones and teeth
       from the main phases of habitation of the Jericho Tell. Polecat and
         marten included with the cats.


  already that there was considerable variation in size which suggests the
  presence of several breeds (of domestic dog). One was of fox terrier size,
  another that of the pariah dog.” This report was based on the examination of
  mandible fragments and isolated teeth of which Plate vi(ii) is one. Contrary
  to Zeuner’s statement, careful measurement of all the Jericho specimens does
  not show any great diversity in size of bones and teeth. Many are indeed the
  size of pariah dogs as represented by skulls in the British Museum (Natural
  History) but a disconcerting fact is discovered when a survey is made of skulls
  of the jackals, wolves, and dogs that are found at the present day in the Near
  East. This is that each species overlaps the others in size, and morphological
  differentiation on skeletal or dental structure is in many cases impossible.
  Fossil evidence suggests that two sub species of jackal occurred in the Palestine
  area in post Pleistocene times. These were Canis aureus lupaster, a large jackal,
  now confined to North Africa, and the common jackal, Canis aureus aureus.5
  Cams aureus lupaster, the Egyptian jackal, is considerably larger than the
  common jackal, and overlaps in size of bones and teeth the pariah dog and
                                           Carnivore remains from Jericho     339


the local Arabian wolf, Canis lupus arabs. No canid remains were found at
Jericho that can be identified as Canis aureus aureus.
  In recent years much discussion has been given to the problem of specific
identification of canid remains from early prehistoric sites in the Near East,
and the general pattern that is emerging shows that these specimens often
cannot be distinguished as dog, wolf, or jackal. In 1937 Bate6 described the
discovery of a Natufian “dog” from Mount Carmel and for many years this
was thought to be one of the earliest records of domestication. Reinvestigation
of this “dog” skull has shown however that it cannot be distinguished from
Canis lupus arabs1. Further discussion of the problems of identification of
Near Eastern canids has been provided by many authors8.
  Measurement of the Canis bones and teeth from Jericho shows that their
size overlaps that of present day pariah dogs, C. lupus arabs, and C. aureus
lupaster. The most commonly found tooth was the lower carnassial (Mi) of
which there were nine, representing seven individuals (four comprise two
pairs). The labial length of these teeth are given below (in the case of the pairs
the mean of the two is given) and compared with measurements of the teeth
of post-glacial canids given by Kurten. Kurten measured all the carnivore
skull and tooth specimens from excavations of the Palestine caves of Mount
Carmel, Kebarah, Shukbah, Zuttiyeh, and Ksar ’Akil, that are in the British
Museum (Natural History) and made a statistical comparison with present
day specimens. In the case of the wolf, measurements show that there has
been a very marked post-glacial dwarfing. The fossil wolf of the late Pleistocene
in Palestine was the same size as the present day European wolf but at the
end of the Pleistocene a drastic reduction in size occurred that was probably
stabilized by Mesolithic times. In the past confusion arose over the identi¬
fication of canid remains from archaeological sites in Palestine because this
post-Pleistocene dwarfing was not recognized. The Natufian canid remains
from Mount Carmel are the same size as those from prehistoric Jericho, and
the same size as the living wolves to be found in the Palestine area.
  It can be seen from the table that on size the lower carnassial teeth from
Jericho fall most closely within Kurten’s observed range for fossil specimens
of C. aureus lupaster from Palestine.
  Measurement of the bones and teeth of Canis spp. from Jericho gives no
clear indication of which species are present nor of sure evidence for domesti¬
cation. There are, however, two mandibles in which the premolar teeth have
been so crowded and displaced that they may have belonged to tamed wolves
if not to domesticated dogs. For it is now generally recognized on anatomical
and behavioural grounds that the progenitor of the dog was the small Asiatic
wolf.
  In early societies such as the Pre-Pottery Neolithic of Jericho there must
have been a sequence of wild to tamed wolf to dog, that is to a definite breed
that can be said to be fully domesticated after generations of breeding in
340   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication             CLUTTON-brock
-—-

captivity. Osteological characters cannot provide evidence for distinguishing
tamed wolf from early domestic dog and it is in fact still doubtful how clear
are the distinctions between wild and tamed wolves. But it is of course
possible to distinguish wild wolf from fully domestic dog. There is no evidence
for such a dog from any of the Jericho levels.
  One of the two mandibular rami. No. M.15.10A, that shows crowding of
the teeth (Plate vi (iii)) comes from the earliest level to contain animal bones,
the Protoneolithic, dated at earlier than 9000 b.p. It is a smaller jaw than any
of the other specimens and the alveoli of the 1st and 2nd premolars are
considerably displaced. It is however only a fragment of charred bone without
teeth and specific identification cannot be made from such a small piece of
jaw. In fact the possibility that it belonged to a member of the genus Cuon
rather than Canis cannot be discounted.


                                             O.R.             M.           S.D.     V.
        Species                   N.*        mm.              mm.          mm.     mm.

Canis aureus aureus
  Recent only                     II      16-1 -18-9      17-77 ± 0-28      0-93   5-2
Canis aureus lupaster
  Fossil                           6      20-4 -23-7     21-75 ± o-6i      1-37    6-3
  Recent                           7      19-5 -22-5     20-86 ± 0-37      0-99    4-7
Canis lupus arabs
  From Wurm                        6      25-1 -31-6     28-20 ± 1-oo      2-50    8-9
  Post-glacial                     2      23-8 -24-3     24-05              —

  Palestine Recent                 5      21-7 -24-2     23-10 ± 0-50       I-IO   4-6
Canis spp. Jericho
  Pre-Pottery A—EB/MB              7      20-65-23-75    22-03 rt 0-41      1-09   4‘95

  * Abbreviations: N—number of specimens measured; O.R.—observed range; M—mean ±
tandard error of the mean; S.D.—standard deviation; V—coefficient of variation.

Table 1 Labial lengths of the lower first molar of canis spp. from Jericho
      compared with those of Canis aureus aureus, Canis aureus lupaster, and
      Canis lupus arabs, quoted from Kurten.(a)
  (a) Kurten, B. (1965). The carnivora of the Palestine caves, Acta Zool. Fenn.


  The second mandibular ramus, No. O.6.21J (Plate vi(i)), that shows
crowding of the teeth was found in the Pottery Neolithic. The cheek teeth are
very large in relation to the length of the ramus (Length of Mi, 23-25 mm.),
and they had come to be compacted in order to be accommodated in the jaw.
It is generally recognized that this compaction and displacement of large teeth
is a diagnostic character of early domestic dogs, but there are as yet no
statistics to show how often it may occur in wild populations of canids.
  All the remaining Canis jaws have large well spaced teeth and there is no
justification for claiming that they belonged to domesticated dogs. There is
so little evidence for the specific identification of the Canis remains from
Jericho that it has been decided that for the present they should only be
described as Canis spp.
                                                Carnivore remains from Jericho      341




       Vulpes vulpes

A total number of 203 bones and teeth of fox have been collected from all
levels, representing 134 individual animals. Remains of foxes greatly out¬
number those of any other carnivore. The great majority of these fox bones
comes from the earliest levels. There are no mammalian bones and teeth
from the Mesolithic but in the Proto-Neolithic there are eighteen fox bones
and teeth representing thirteen individual animals, whereas all other mamma¬
lian remains from this period only number nine specimens. In the Pre-
Pottery A levels, the 105 fox specimens still outnumber those of any other
species. From the Pre-Pottery B levels onwards the number of foxes repre¬
sented steadily decreases.
  It can only be assumed that foxes were eaten and hunted for furs by the
Proto-Neolithic and Pre-Pottery people along with any other wild animals that
could be caught. Fox bones and teeth are found as individual specimens


                                              O.R.             M.           S.D.    V.
           Period                   N.*       mm.              mm.          mm.    mm.

Post-glacial                        55     136 -17-1      15-24 ± o-ii      o-8i   5-3
Shukbah A                            6     14-0 -15-0     14-37 ± 0-15      0-37   2-6
Recent                               9     12-2 -14-8     13-76 dt 0-30     0-91   6-6
Jericho Pre-Pottery Neolithic        3     I3-I9JI3-351   14-15              —     —
                                           16-0
Jericho Pre-Pottery A               17     12-55-15-80    I3-85 ± 0-22      0-92   5-4
Jericho Pre-Pottery B                2     12-00-14-90    13-45              —     —
Jericho Pre-Pottery A/B              1           15-65          —            —     —
Jericho Byzantine                    1           14-10          —            —     —
Jericho all levels                  24     12-00-16-00    I3-94 ± 0-22      1-09   7-82


  * Abbreviations: N—number of specimens measured; O.R.—observed range; M—mean ±
standard error of the mean; S.D.—standard deviation; V—coefficient of variation.

Table 2 Labial length of the lower first molar of Vulpes vulpes(a) from Jericho
     compared with those measured by Kurten both fossil and recent.
  (a) Kurtto, B. (1965). The carnivora of the Palestine caves, Acta Zool. Fenn.


widely dispersed through the early levels of the excavations and 7% of the
bones are burnt. This is approximately the same percentage as is found for
the remains of other food animals. The nine bones and mandible fragments
from the Byzantine may however represent a single animal that was killed
as a pest and not eaten but thrown out, for the bones were found together
in a rubbish pit.
   Kurten9 also found that foxes outnumbered in their remains all other
species from the cave excavations, Kurten’s statistical analysis of the
measurements of fox teeth from these caves has shown that there has been a
marked change in size of the fox since the last glaciation. In post-mesolithic
times there has been a reduction in size of the fox similar to that found by
342   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   clutton-brock


Kurten for the wolf and the wild cat. The population represented by fossils
from level A at Shukbah is intermediate in size between the large mesolithic
form and the present day fox. Shukbah A is of uncertain date but it is later
than the underlying mesolithic strata and could be similar to the Proto-
neolithic of Jericho, that is it is later than 7800 ± 210 B.C.
  A comparison may be made with Kurten’s measurements of fossil foxes
from the Palestine caves and with those of the Jericho specimens. As with
Canis spp. the most commonly found tooth was the lower carnassial. A table
is therefore given below of Kurten’s measurements for this tooth compared
with those from Jericho.
  Unfortunately the sample of teeth from the Proto-Neolithic is too small
to reflect any size change from fox teeth of later periods but it is noteworthy
that in agreement with Kurten’s measurements the largest fox carnassial
(L.—16-oo mm.) does come from the earliest levels and it is possible that
these Proto-Neolithic foxes were rather larger animals than the Palestinian
fox of the present day.
  Zeuner10 notes that the remains of foxes that have been killed for food are
not uncommon finds from early archaeological sites. In the neolithic lake-
dwellings of Switzerland fox bones were common and bore cutting and tooth
marks that showed they had been eaten by humans. Fox remains have also
been recorded in large numbers by Degerbol from the Maglemose of Den¬
mark. Flannery11 also comments on the remains of foxes amongst food
debris from prehistoric sites in Iran.



       Ursidae

 Ursus arctos. Only a single bone of bear has been retrieved from the Jericho
excavations. With the absence of lion remains and the scarcity of leopard
this is surprising and suggests that throughout the long period of habitation
over which the excavation extended, there was very little hunting of large
carnivores.



       Incertae sedis

 Vormela peregusna. The complete facial and maxillary region of the skull of a
 small carnivore was found in the Middle Bronze Age. The cranium is missing
 and most of the teeth except for two canines and two premolars. This skull
 has been provisionally identified as belonging to the marbled polecat,
 Vormela peregusna.
   Mai tes martes. A single metapodial bone, provisionally identified as marten
 was found in the Pre-Pottery A.
                                           Carnivore remains from Jericho     343



      Felidae

There are at least four types of wild felid represented by fragmentary bones
and teeth. The lack of complete bones however makes it difficult to differentiate
the species with the exception of the leopard. Three bones of leopard have
been identified; a second phalanx from the Pre-Pottery B, a charred cal-
caneum from the Pottery Neolithic, and a first phalanx from the Middle
Bronze Period. This bone was severely damaged during life, only the anterior
surface of the shaft remains and there is no marrow cavity.
  The leopard {Panthera pardus) is the largest felid present; it is surprising
that there are no lion remains, for lions must have been abundant in the
mountains of Palestine throughout prehistoric times as they were in historic
times until at least the Roman Period12.
  Apart from the leopard bones there are thirty-six other felid bones and
teeth representing twenty-nine individual cats. The majority of these come
from the Pre-Pottery levels and the bones were found with other food
remains.
  It is extremely difficult to determine the species of these cat bones, which
are mostly in a very fragmentary condition. It was decided that the most
practicable way of dealing with the specimens was to grade them according
to size and suggest the species present on this basis. The largest of the bones
and teeth may belong to the caracal lynx, Felis caracal, although the teeth
are not identical in cusp shape with those of caracal skulls in the British
Museum (Natural History).
 The next group of cat remains, smaller than those ascribed to the caracal
lynx, falls most closely within the size of F. chaus. Twelve skeletal bones of this
species were found in the Pre-Pottery periods, the Pottery Neolithic and the
Middle Bronze Age.
 The smallest cat bones and teeth have been identified as belonging to
F. lybica. Fourteen specimens of this cat have been found from the Proto-
neolithic and Pre-Pottery Neolithic periods but none from later levels. The
Libyan cat has been suggested as being the ancestor of the domestic cat13
and it has similar body proportions to the domestic cat. Zeuner14 has con¬
sidered the possibility that the small cat remains from Jericho could have
been those of domesticated animals but there is no osteological evidence for
this.
   Kurten15 measured the teeth of all the fossil cats from excavations in
Palestine caves that are in die collection of the British Museum (Natural
History). He made a statistical comparison of these fossil cat teeth with those
of recent specimens and found that, as with the other carnivores, there was a
drastic reduction in size of the wild cat of Palestine at the beginning of the
 Mesolithic.
  It is not practical to compare Kurten’s measurements with those of the
344   Part HI Regional and local evidence for domestication        clutton-brock


Jericho cats because of the small number of specimens from Jericho and the
uncertainty of their specific identification.



      Discussion

It can be seen from the above descriptions that the numbers of carnivore
remains from Jericho, with the exception of minor finds such as the few
leopard and bear bones, comprise a total of thirty-six specimens of Canis spp.,
two hundred and three of foxes and thirty-six of cat. Were any of these
animals domesticated ? The osteological evidence for the presence of domestic
dogs is slender and rests on the few jaws that had compacted teeth. The very
large number of fox bones in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic implies that this canid
was the most heavily exploited carnivore during these early periods. It is
however more likely that scavenging foxes were killed (perhaps by trapping)
for meat and skins rather than that they were tamed or domesticated. The
same must be true of the cats, and wolves and jackals would have been killed
and eaten whenever they could be caught.
  The lack of domestic dog bones in the Bronze Age periods remains a
mystery. A comparison may be made here with the Bronze Age site of
Emporio on the island of Chios, Greece16 where remains of undoubted
domestic dog were common. At Emporio there were forty bones and teeth
of Bronze Age dogs, whereas, amongst the very much larger total number of
bones at Jericho, there are only seven Bronze Age specimens of Canis spp.
This does not necessarily mean, of course, that the Bronze Age people of
Jericho did not keep dogs, only that they did not eat them. It is possible that
dogs were considered to be “unclean” animals and that their carcases were
thrown outside the city walls. In this case their remains would not be found
with those of food animals in the habitation levels17.



      Notes

      1 Kenyon, K. M. (1957). Digging up Jericho. London; Kenyon, K. M.
        (i960). Archaeology in the Holy Land. London.
      2 Where two or more bones were found in articulation these were counted
        as one specimen. Because of the dispersion of the bones over the very wide
        range of levels it is reasonable to assume that these absolute numbers do in
        fact represent the minimum number of individuals present.
      3 Kurten, B. (1965). The carnivora of the Palestine caves, Acta Zool. Fenn.
      4 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, p. 94.
      5 Bodenheimer, F. S. (1935)- Animal life in Palestine. Jerusalem; Harrison,
        D. L. (1968). The Mammals of Arabia, II. Carnivora, Hydracoidea,
        Artiodactyla. London.
      6 Bate, D. M. A. (1937), in Garrod, D. A. E. and Bate, D. M. A. The Stone
        Age of Mount Carmel, Excavations at the Wady El-Mughara, I. Oxford,
        pp.I57-253-
                                       Carnivore remains from Jericho      345

 7 Clutton-Brock, J. (1962). Near Eastern canids and the affinities of the
   Natufian dogs, Z. Tierzucht. ZiichtBioL, 76, pp. 326-33.
 8 Degerbpl, M. (1961). On a find of a Preboreal domestic dog (Canis
   familiar is L.) from Star Carr, Yorkshire, with remarks on other domestic
   dogs, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 27, pp. 35-55; Kurten, B. (1965). ibid.; Lawrence,
    B. (1956), in Field, H. An anthropological reconnaissance in the Near
    East, 1950, Papers Peabody Mus. Harvard, 48 (2), App. E., pp. 80-1;
    Lawrence, B. (1967). Early domestic dogs, Sonderdruck ausZ.f. Saiigetier-
    kunde, 32 (1), pp. 44-59; Reed, C. A. (i960). A review of archaeological
    evidence on animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East, in Braid-
    wood, R. J. and Howe, B. Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi Kurdistan,
    Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilisation, Oriental Inst., Chicago, 31,
    pp. 119-45; Reed, C. A. (1961). Osteological evidence for prehistoric
    domestication in South-western Asia, Z. Tierzucht. ZiichtBioL, 76, p. 38.
 9 Kurten, B. (1965). ibid.
10 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit.
11 Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100; Flannery, K. V. (1967), in
    Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. The prehistory of Western Iran: a pre¬
    liminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp. 147-207.
12 Bodenheimer, F. S. (i960). Animal and Man in Bible Lands. Leiden.
13 Bodenheimer, F. S. (1935). ibid.; Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit.
14 Zeuner, F. E. (1958). Dog and cat in the Neolithic of Jericho, Palestine
    Exploration Quarterly, pp. 52-5.
15 Kurten, B. (1965). ibid.
16 Clutton-Brock, J. (In press). Animal remains from the Bronze Age
    Excavations of Emporio, Chios, in Hood, M. S. F. Excavations at the
    Bronze Age Site of Emporio, Chios, Greece.
17 The work for this report was aided by a grant from the National Environ¬
    mental Research Council to Dr. Kathleen Kenyon, to whom I am
    additionally indebted for the time she spent answering my many queries
    on the complicated phases of the excavation. My thanks are due to Pro¬
    fessor Dimbleby of the Department of Human Environment, Institute of
    Archaeology, London, for the use of one of his research rooms and to Dr.
    F. C. Fraser and Miss J. E. King of the Osteology Room at the British
    Museum (Natural History) for the facilities that they offered me during
    the course of the work.
      G. W. I. HODGSON

      Some difficulties of interpreting the metrical data
      derived from the remains of cattle at the Roman
      settlement of Corstopitum


Metrical data have been obtained on the bones of domestic Bos brachyceros
and Ovis aries excavated from the Roman settlement of Corstopitum in the
years 19661 and 19672. These data, when treated with those published by
Meek and Gray3 for the excavations from 1906-10, provide a major source
of metrical data referring to the long bones of sheep and cattle from the
Romano-British period. The indications are that the site will continue to yield
more skeletal material for several years to come4.



      Cattle long bones

The validity of treating the 1911 published data together with those data
obtained by the author may seem open to question. However, “Student” t
tests, to establish the significance between the means of samples of measure¬
ments published for the distal widths of cattle metapodials3 and those
excavated in 1966 and measured by the author, suggest that the differences
between the means are not significant at probabilities of 0-05 and o-oi. The
test employed applies to a normal distribution, so an investigation was made
to see if the distribution of measurements about their mean values was
similar to a normal curve. Cornu’s criterion5 was applied to the distal width
measurements of cattle metapodials. This test compares the standard devia¬
tion (s.d.) with arithmetic mean deviation from the average values (e); for
Cornu’s Value:
                  s.d.
                v = 1-25
                        2|jc — x\
                            n
348     Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   HODGSON


The values obtained were:


    (a) metacarpals ^ = 1-29 for 155 specimens


    (b) metatarsals — = 1-45 for 173 specimens
    v               e

    These values express the positive skewing which is seen in Figs. 1 and 2,
where the same data are expressed in histogram form. The positive skewing
may be due to one or more of the following causes:

1 there could have been a mixed population of cows, steers and bulls in
    which the more massive bull bones may skew the curve. Application of
                                  , .       distal-breadth     100
    Howard’s6 so-called metapodial indices,                X         and
                                                length
    mid-breadth       100   . ..
                    X —     mdicates    that some bulls were present but
       length           1
    that the bulk of the material is from steers and/or cows. The sample size is
    necessarily smaller for the MB/L index as most of the metapodials cannot
    be included because they have been smashed as if for marrow extraction.
    We cannot be certain to what extent castration was practised.
2 the introduction of larger forms in order to improve stock or to provide
    draught animals.
3   because of slaughtering of a preferred class of animal as regards size, age
    or maturity. At a given age class we would expect a normal distribution
    for any single dimension, but preference for killing at a particular age
    would give a skewed distribution rising to a peak at bone dimension
      appropriate to that preferred class, e.g. veal. We cannot consider bones
      of specific age groups but can only assume that the sum total of bones
      covers the sum total of age groups at which the animals were killed. There
      were no obvious signs of any very young or very aged cattle having been
  slaughtered and these curves may reflect the preferred class for slaughter.
4 the sample of 155 metacarpals and 173 metatarsals may be atypical.

    Jewell’s' work of comparing the length or width ranges of certain bones
from various sites has been extended. The Corstopitum metacarpal length
ranges from 15-7 cm. to 20-3 cm., the distal width of the metacarpals from
4'5 t0 7'3 cm- an-d distal width of the humerus from 47 to 8-i cm. These
include specimens which are shorter and narrower than any reported from
all those sites, extending from the mesolithic to the mediaeval period, which are
listed in Appendix II, except for a single metacarpal from the Iron Age village
ot Catcote1 2 3 4 which is 0-2 cm. shorter than the smallest from Corstopitum.
    When the upper limits of the ranges of the same three dimensions are
considered the Corstopitum ranges include specimens which are longer or
wider than those described from any of the Iron Age and Romano-British
                                          The remains of cattle from Corstopitum   349




SPECIMENS



OF




NUMBER




            DISTAL   WIDTH   IN   mm



                      Fig 1 Corstopitum. Cattle metacarpal distal widths
350                    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication           HODGSON




          42-

          41 '
          40-

           39-
            36-
            37-

            36-
            35-

            34-
            33-
           32-
           31 -
                                                         127 SPECIMENS     PROM >911 REPORT
           30 -                                           23 SPECIMENS     FROM 1966 REPORT
                                                          23   SPECIMENS   FROM 1967 EXCAVATION (UNPUBLISHED)
            29 -
                                                         173   SPECIMENS   PLOTTED
           29-

            27-
                                                               1mm   INTERVALS
            26-
                                                               1 mm INTERVALS
            25-

           24 -
            23 _

            22 -                                         MEAN = SS= 4-99 cm
                                                                 N
                21 -                                     STANDARD DEVIATION = 0-547 cm

                20-

                19 -
                18 -
                17 -

                16 -
                15 -
                14 -
                13 -
                12 -

                II -
                10 -

                 9 -




 OF SPECIMENS
                 8 -
                 7 -

                 6 -
                 S -

                 4 -
                 3



 number
                 2
                  1

                 o


                       DISTAL   WIDTH   IN   mm




                                 Fig 2 Corstopitum. Cattle metatarsal distal widths.
                                      The remains of cattle from Corstopitum    351


sites cited, except for a single metacarpal from Rotherley32 which exceeds the
longest Corstopitum specimen by 0-2 cm.
  Jewell7 has commented on the gradual diminution in size of cattle from
British ancient sites from the neolithic ox, of earlier sites, to the Celtic Short¬
horn of Iron Age and Romano-British times and of the diversity of types of
cattle from Roman sites with the emergence of beasts larger than those which
commonly existed in the preceding centuries. Whether the small forms at
Corstopitum represent an unimproved stock or a diminution in size due to
domestication and the larger forms represent an improvement of the stock by
selective breeding or the importation of large draught animals, or whether the
larger size is merely residual from an ancient stock, cannot be ascertained.
It may be that the larger and smaller specimens merely represent the upper
and lower limits of a single population and that because the Corstopitum
sample is large, more of the extreme forms are found here. At the time of
writing the bones have been treated as being all Romano-British but an
attempt is being made to distinguish the different occupational levels from
which the bones are found with a view to finding how size varied during an
occupational time of several centuries1.



      Appendix I
      Statistical data referring to bones of cattle excavated at Corstopitum in
      19661 and 19672 and for those published in 19113


Cattle. Bos taurus longifrons
                                            Number     Mean Standard deviation
Metacarpals (distal width)                    155     5-38 cm.     0-539 cm
Metatarsals (distal width)                    173     4-99 cm.     0-546 cm
Tibia (distal width)                           93     5’34 cm.     0-535 cm
Radius (distal width)                          68     59 cm.       0-65 cm.
Scapula
(a) minimum width of neck                     332     475 cm.      0-49 cm.
{b) maximum “diameter” glenoid
      cavity                                  203     5-08 cm.     0-37 cm.




      Appendix II

                             Reference                                  Reference
Mesolithic                                     Matignons                  10
  Star Carr                       8            Puddle Hill                 11
Neolithic                                      Skara Brae                  12
  Maiden Castle I                9             Stonehenge                  13
352   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication       HODGSON


                             Reference                                    Reference
Neolithic                                     Catcote                         1
  Whitehawk Bay                 14            Glastonbury                    27
  Windmill Hill                 15            Little Woodbury                28
  Woodhenge                     16         Romano-British
Bronze Age                                    Caerleon                       29
  BoscombeDown                  17            Eastwood-Fawkham               30
  Castle Hill                   18            Highdole Hill                  31
  Jarlshof Sumburgh,                          Rotherley                      32
    Shetland                    19            The Rumps                       33
  Lowes Farm                    20            Woodcuts                        32
  Maiden Castle II               9            Woodyates                       32
  Minnis Bay              21               Mediaeval
  Ogbourne West Enclosure 22                  Kirkstall                       34
  Ratfyn                        23            Northolt                        34
  Skendleby                     24            Peter gate                      34
  Snail Down                    25            Pontefract                      34
Iron Age                                      Well Street                     35
   All Cannings Cross           26


      Notes
       1 I am indebted to Professor Birley of Durham University and to John
         Gillam, M.A., F.S.A., of Newcastle University for allowing me to work
         on the material excavated at Corstopitum during 1966 and 1967.


      Notes to Appendixes
       x Hodgson, G. W. I. (1967). A comparative account of faunal remains from
         some ancient sites in the North of England. M.Sc. Thesis, Durham
           University.
       2 Hodgson, G. W. I. Unpublished data on faunal remains from 1967
         excavation at Corstopitum.
       3 Meek, A. and Gray, R. A. H. (1911), in Forster, R. H. and Knowles,
         W. H. Corstopitum, Archaeologia Aeliana, 3 ser., 7, pp. 78-125.
       4 The material, identified, measured and catalogued is now stored in the
         Hancock Museum, Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
       5 Brooks, C. E. P. and Carruthers, N. (1953). Handbook of Statistical
         Methods in Meteorology. H.M.S.O. p. 42.
       6 Howard, M. M. (1963). The metrical determination of the metapodials
         and skulls of cattle, Roy. Anthropol. Inst., Occasional Paper, 18, pp. 91-100.
       7 Jewell, P. A. (1962). Changes in size and type of cattle from Prehistoric
         to Medieval Times in Britain, Z. Tierzucht. Zucht Biol., 77. pp. 159-67.
       8 Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954), in Clark, J. G. D. Star Carr.
         Cambridge, pp. 70-95.
       9 Jackson, J. W. (1943), di Wheeler, R. E. M. Maiden Castle, Dorset.
         London, pp. 360-71.
      10 Poulain-Josien, T. (1966), in Burney, C. and Case, H. Les Camps
         Neolithiaues des Matignons, Gallia Prehist., 9. Fig. 1, pp. 210-38.
                              The remains of cattle from Corstopitum      353


11 Field, N. R., Mathews, C. L. and Smith, I. F. (1964). New neolithic
   sites in Dorset and Bedfordshire (Puddlehill), Proc. Prehist. Soc., 15,
   pp. 364-6.
12 Watson, D. M. S. (1931), in Childe, V. G. Skara Brae. A Pictish Village
   in Orkney. London, pp. 198-204.
13 Jackson, J. W. (1935). The animal remains from the Stonehenge excava¬
   tions of 1920-26, Antiq. J., 15. pp. 434-40.
14 Jackson, J. W. (1934), in Curwen, E. C. Excavations in Whitehawk
   Neolithic Camp. Brighton 1932-3. Antiq. Journ., 14. pp. 127-9.
15 Jope, M. and Grigson, C. (1965), in Keiller, A. Windmill Hill and Avebury.
   Oxford, pp. 141-67.
16 Jackson, J. W. (1929), in Cunnington, M. E. Woodhenge. Devizes, pp.
   61-9.
17 Jackson, J. W. (1936), in Stone, J. F. S. An enclosure on Boscombe Down
   East, Wilts. Arch. Mag., 47. pp. 484-7.
18 Jackson, J. W. (1939). Report on the animal remains from the late Bronze
   Age site of Castle Hill, Sussex Arch. Coll., 80. pp. 267-8.
19 Platt, I. P. (1933), in Curie, A. O. Excavations at Jarlshof, Shetland,
   Proc. Soc. Antiq., Scot., 1932-3, 67 6th series, 7, pp. 127-35, and also
   1933-4, 68 6th series, 8, pp. 313—18.
20 Higgs, E. S. and Shawcross, F. W. (1961). The excavation of a Bos
   primigenius at Lowes Farm, Littleport, Proc. Camb. Ant. Soc., 54. pp. 3-16.
21 Jackson, J. W. (1943),in Worsford, F. H. Late Bronze Age Site at Minnis
   Bay, Birchington, Kent, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 9. pp. 41-4.
22 Jackson, J. W. (1942), in Piggott, C. M. Five late Bronze Age Enclosures
   in North Wilts, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 8. pp. 54-9.
23 Jackson, J. W. (1935), in Stone, J. F. S. Some discoveries at Ratfyn,
   Amesbury, Wilts. Arch. Mag., 47. pp. 66-7.
24 Jackson, J. W. (1935), in Phillips, C. W. The Excavations of the Giant
   Hills, Long Barrow, Skendleby, Lines, Archaeologia, 85. pp. 95-9.
25 Snail Down. Reported as being in preparation by Jewell, P. A. (1963).
   Cattle from British Archaeological Sites, Roy. Anthrop. Inst., Occasional
   Paper, 18. pp. 80-1.
26 Jackson, J. W. (1923), in Cunnington, M. E. The Early Iron Age Site at All
   Cannings Cross Farm, Wilts. Devizes, pp. 43-50.
27 Dawkins, W. Boyd, and Jackson, J. W. (1917), in Bulleid, A. and Gray,
   A. St. G. The Glastonbury Lake Village, Glastonbury Antiquarian Soc.
   pp. 643-72.
28 Fraser, F. C. (1948), in Brailsford, J. Excavations at Little Woodbury,
   Proc. Prehist. Soc., 14. pp. 19-23.
29 Watson, D. M. S. (1928), in Wheeler, R. E. M. and Wheeler, T. V. Report
   on the animal bones from Caerleon, Arch., 78. pp. 214-15.
30 Chaplin, R. E. and Coy, J. P. (1963), in Phillip, B. J. The Romano-
   British Farmstead at Eastwood Fawkham, Archaeologia Cantiana,
   78. pp. 70-2.
31 Jackson, J. W. (1936), in Holleyman, G. A. An early British agricultural
   village site on Highdole Hill, Tescombe, Sussex Arch. Coll., 77. pp.
   202-21.
32 Pitt-Rivers, A. (1888). Excavations at Cranbourne Chase, 1. 2, 3. London.
   (/, pp. 171-88; II, pp. 209-28; III, pp. 233-9.)
33 Chaplin, R. E. and Coy, J. P. (1964)5 in Brooks, R. T. Report of the 1963
   excavations at the Rumps, St. Minver, Cornish Arch., 3. pp. 26-34.
34 Ryder, M. L. (1961). Livestock remains from four mediaeval sites in
   Yorkshire, Agricultural Hist. Rev., 9. pp. 105-10.
35 Chaplin, R. E. (1966). The animal remains from the Well Street Site,
   Coventry, Birmingham Arch. Soc., 81. pp. 130-8.
.
      MARIA HOPF

      Plant remains and early farming in Jericho1


Excavations in the Middle East and Asia Minor since 1950 have brought
to light cereals from the Pre-Pottery settlement layers which go back to
the beginning of farming. Both barley and hulled wheats were found.
Without exception the barley belonged to the hulled two-rowed form, Hordeum
distichum, in so far as it is distinguishable—with its fragile rachis—from H.
spontaneum. Naked and multi-rowed hulled barley first occurred in the later
layers. Helbaek2 concluded that the two-rowed barley must have been the
original form, from which the multi-rowed forms arose through the mutation
of a single gene causing the lateral flowers to become fertile.
  Similar observations have been made with wheat. In Jarmo (6500 b.c.)
Helbaek3 found a hulled wheat closely related to Triticum dicoccoides as well
as T. dicoccum, and in Ali Kosh (6900 b.c.), Beidha (6500 b.c.) and Hacilar
(6500 b.c.) there was also emmer. T. monococcum occurred together with
emmer in places of equal age, though always only in small numbers, so that
it seems to have been of secondary importance. It is only absent from Beidha,
the most southerly site, which lies outside the area of distribution of wild
einkorn, T. boeoticum. There may be two reasons for these findings: either
the wild cereals were brought into cultivation in more than one place at
more or less the same time, and the crop was related to the local wild plants;
or the culture spread from a centre in the Middle East in which all three
above-named primitive forms occurred. Where the local conditions of the
secondary territory did not suit one or other of the species, as for instance at
Beidha, perhaps it died out.
  In the light of the complex questions outlined here, the observations on the
plant remains from early Jericho (Pre-Pottery to Bronze Age) are of particular
interest, for it lies in the range of distribution of H. spontaneum and T. dic¬
occoides, though T. boeoticum is absent here—at least at the present day4. The
Pre-Pottery layers here began—according to carbon-14 dating—c. 7000 b.c.
  In addition to the impressions in mud-brick—which there is not space
to discuss here—there are altogether no samples of carbonized cereal grains,
legumes and fruits, which can be divided up according to the observed
period of settlement as follows:
356    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication         hopf



                     Pre-Pot.   Pre-Pot.   Pot.    Chaleo-   Early    Early    Middle
                                   B       Neol.    lithic   Bronze   Middle   Bronze
      Species           A

% of total nos. of
                                  Q        6°/       0/      6o%               12%
  samples              4%         y 0/
                                    /o                /O               7%
                                   X        X        X         X        X       X
H. distichum            X
                                                                        X       X
H. nudum
                                   X        X                  X        X       X
T. monococcum
                                   X        X                  X        X       X
T. dicoccum             X
T. aestivum s.l.                                               X        X       X
                                                               X                X
Vitis ( pipS                                                   X                X
      \ fruits
Ficus                   x                            X         X                X
Pisum                              X                                    X       X
Lens                               X                           X        X       X
Vida cf. faba                      X                                            X
Cicer                              X?                          X        X
Avena                              X?                          X                X
Bromus                                      X                  X        X       X
Linum                                                          X
Punica                                                                          X
Phoenix                                                        X
Allium                                                         X                X
Crudferae                                   X                  X                X




   Leaving aside the few very small Bronze Age grains of naked barley (37 X
r8 X 1-4 mm.) all the finds of barley belong to the two-rowed hulled form
H. distichum. The grains are long and relatively flat (6-2 X 3-2 X 23 mm.)
and rachis segments with weak marginal hairs were repeatedly observed,
carrying the strong median florets but with the lateral florets only represented
by small weak stalks. In the Pre-Pottery A two simple rachis segments and a
total of six small grains (5-2 x 2-5 x i-8 mm.) were found, while by the
following period B the grain size had increased considerably (6-o X 3 0 x
2-3 mm.) and with c. 1200 grains there were also found rachis segments with
2 or 3 connected internodes, evidence for the cultivated form with a tough
rachis which probably did not occur in the previous phase.
   Of the hulled wheats the oldest period yielded only two single grains of
emmer, Triticum dicoccum. This species is also represented in all the later
periods by grains, rachis segments, spikelets and a number of obliquely
inserted terminal spikelets. Considerable difficulties arise in distinguishing it
from einkom, T. monococcum, which occurs regularly and abundantly from
the Pre-Pottery B level of Jericho onwards. Einkorn occurs largely in the
two-grained form; the length of the fruit does not exceed that of emmer, its
ventral side is not arched outwards, and the width of the grain usually corre¬
sponds with that of emmer. Therefore the characteristically curved embryo-
end of einkorn must serve as the distinguishing character. Furthermore,
emmer alters on carbonizing, in contrast to einkorn, so that the upper half
swells up and it becomes drop-shaped, as was found in all the settlement
phases at Jericho. No significant difference could be detected in the width
of the rachis segments of einkorn and emmer. Typical grains of naked wheat.
                               Plant remains and early farming in Jericho     357

T. aestivum s.l., with short straight rounded scutellum, occur from the Early
Bronze Age, while a piece of a strong twisted awn in the Pre-Pottery A, and
subsequently also a fruit in the Early Bronze Age, indicate the presence of
(? wild) oats, Avena sp.
  The roundish horse-bean, Vida cf. faba, resembles those shown by
Feinbrunn5 (see below); with a mean diameter of 5-3 mm. it is only a
little larger than the largest peas, Pisum cf. sativum (min. 3-0, max. 5-5 mm.).
The size of the palisade cells and stalk cells in their testa makes it possible to
refer material to Vicia with safety. The lentils, Lens culinaris, have a diameter
of 3-0 mm., smaller than the Bronze Age examples described by Feinbrunn6
from Beth-Shean and by Helbaek7 from Lachish.
  Chickpea, Cicer arietinum, occurred in great quantities in the Early Bronze
Age; fragments without shells, from the Pre-Pottery B, could also belong
here.
  Carbonized fig-pips. Ficus cf. carica, could be detected in many samples
after the first settlement; only once was any of the flesh of the fruit found.
In addition to the innumerable pips of the vine, Vitis vinifera, with their
short, clearly thickened stalk, many carbonized berries also occurred, mostly
containing 2-4 pips. It is a moot point whether the shape of the pips or the
number in each berry are indicative of the primitive state. On the other hand,
a cultivated form certainly appeared at tire same time in flax, Linum usitatis-
simum; in addition to seeds (4-2 x 1-9 mm.), separate carpels and a complete
capsule (6-2 x 5-5 mm.) were found. It is only dehiscent at the very tip, along
the suture of a carpel; the wild form usually bursts open in the middle of the
carpel as well. Kenyon8 reported the occurrence of fragments of wall of
pomegranate, Punica granatum, and in support of this were found pips (3-8 X
2-0 mm.) which are considerably smaller than those of modem varieties on
the market today. The only date-stone, Phoenix dactylifera, from the Early
Bronze Age measured 1275 X 675 mm. The “onions” are long and slender,
and could originate from Allium cf. ampeloprasum. The occurrence of weeds
is very slight, from which it is evident that only threshed and winnowed
harvest products are present at the actual centres of settlement; the waste
material will have been left behind at the threshing place.
 From Phase A only 6 barley grains, 2 grains of emmer, 46 fig pips, and
3 broken pieces (at least 3-5 mm. long) of a legume were found, so it is doubt¬
ful whether this represents the complete stock of the earliest fruit, nuts and
cultivated plants from Jericho, and one does not know whether einkorn
and several species of legumes in the Pre-Pottery B are to be looked upon
as additional new species or whether they are old forms which have only not
been recovered previously. The full Neolithic, in spite of technical progress
(pottery), surprisingly shows a remarkable paucity of species, which in turn
is even more conspicuous in the Chalcolithic. There is a complete change
in the Early Bronze Age, in which, in addition to the species already known
from the Pre-Pottery B, no less than six new records were produced: Triticum
358   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     hopf


aestivum, Vitis, Linum, Phoenix, Allium and Cicer (if Cicer were not already
present in Pre-Pottery B). Neither of the following periods show any further
new introductions (apart from Punka). The reappearance in the Middle
Bronze Age of beans with a somewhat larger seed (5-6 mm.) than in the Pre-
Pottery B (5-2 mm.) could indicate equally either a reintroduction or a
continuation of its use.
  If one considers the wild plants occurring in the nearby or more remote
surroundings of the settlement9, the finds in general indicate they did not
originate from the native flora. For instance, Triticum boeoticum is absent in
Palestine. If einkorn should actually first occur in the Pre-Pottery B (c. 6250
b.c.) in Jericho,   the destroyers of the tower and the builders of the third
and fourth walls must at least have invaded through the area of distribution of
wild einkorn which lies to the north, whilst the tower builders of Phase A
(c. 6800 B.c.) had at their disposal in the countryside wild barley and wild
emmer for domestication and the fig for gathering.
  The newly arrived potters of the first half of the fifth millennium do not
seem to have practised intensive farming; the plant remains therefore give
no clue to the origin of these inhabitants. Among the plants of the Early
Bronze Age (from 3200 B.C.) on the other hand, vine (in 28 samples!) and a
single grain of naked wheat indicate connections with the north or north¬
east, whilst Linum, Cicer, Phoenix and Allium do not need to be of foreign
origin. However, the flax capsule must be considered to have a shape modified
by cultivation, so these other plants or at least their products, though they
have not previously appeared in the tell, could also have been a valued
commodity of the newcomers.
  On the basis of the finds described, cultivation in Jericho during the Pre-
Pottery A phase could possibly be traced to the taking into cultivation of
native wild plants. In phase B an alien northern element shows itself in
Triticum monococcum, but whether it actually occurred earlier could not be
determined with certainty because of the small amount of material found.
For this reason the hypothesis of a local development of farming is weak,
although the fragility of the Hordeum rachis is also evidence of an early stage
of domestication; this characteristic could nevertheless be related to the
invasion of a local wild barley into an already highly developed system of
field crops.



      Notes
       1 cf. Kenyon, K. M. (i960). Excavations at Jericho, 1. Palestine Exploration
         Society, London; Kenyon, K. M. (1965). Excavations at Jericho, 2.
         1 alestme Exploration Society, London.
       2 lle^.ae^5    (x966). Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and
         Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20. pp. 350-60.
       3 Helbaek, H. (1966). Pre-Pottery neolithic farming at Beidha, Palestine
         Exploration Quarterly, 98, pp. 61-6.
                              Plant remains and early farming in Jericho      359


     4 Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheat and barley, Science, 153,
       pp. 1074-9.
     5 Feinbrunn, N. (1938). New data on some cultivated plants and weeds of
       the early bronze age in Palestine, Palestine J. Bot.,J. Ser., I, pp. 238-40.
     6 Feinbrunn, N. (1938). ibid.
     7 Helbaek, H. (1958). Plant economy in ancient Lachish, in Tufnell, O.
       (1958). Lachish IV. London, pp. 309-17.
     8 Kenyon, K. M. (i960), op. cit. pi. XVII.
     9 Zohary, M. (1962). Plant Life of Palestine. New York.




13—dopaa   *   *
      CHARLES A. REED

       The pattern of animal domestication in the
      prehistoric Near East

Agriculture, which includes animal domestication, is a part of the long
history of human cultural adaptation whereby man, probably more by trial
and error than purposeful forethought, achieved increasing control of his
environment. Viewed in this light, the cultivated plants and domestic animals
are as much artifacts of human culture as was an Olduwan pebble tool or is
any modern tool; each of these was wrought from nature by man and allows
him to divert more of the energy in his ecosystem to his own purposes.
Through the increase of foodstuffs after the beginning of the Agricultural
(Neolithic or Food-Producing) Revolution, the human species has incredibly
multiplied its own population at the expense of the rest of the world’s
biota.
  Archaeological and natural-historical evidences combine to place this
earliest agriculture in the lower hills and adjacent plains of the area east of the
Mediterranean into south-western Iran. Here grew the wild emmer and ein-
korn wheats and the wild two-rowed barley1 first cultivated and here occurred
also the wild mammals—wolf, goat, sheep, pig and cattle—which were the
earliest domesticants. Here too—in the Levant, in southern Turkey, and
along the western edges of the Zagros ranges—the earliest evidences of
agriculture, including the bones of the first domesticants, are being recovered
by archaeologists. We must not, of course, overlook the possibilities that
other men in many places may have been doing similar things. There is for
instance the report of independent domestication of sheep in Dobrogea,
Rumania2, at about the same time this process was happening in the foothills
of the Zagros Mts.
   For more than 99% of their co-existence, man and other animals came
together as hunter and prey, man more often being the hunter. The change to
man the domesticator was thus a major behavioural shift in human adaptation
for the utilization of animal resources. In analysing this basic change in the
man-animal situation, the relations between four possible variables must be
considered: 1 the evolving morphology, intelligence, and innate behaviour
of the animals; 2 the evolving morphology, intelligence, and innate behaviour
362   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     reed


of the particular men involved; 3 pertinent changes in the environment; 4
changes in human culture.
  The first two of these potential variables can be discounted. The plants and
animals did not together evolve to a stage of potential domesticability; indeed,
they undoubtedly could have been cultivated and/or domesticated for several
millions of years before they were. Man had been modem in form and
behaviour, in so far as can be determined, for some 25,000 years before
domestication occurred. However, in the area involved and at the time (some
11,000 years ago) of the earliest evidences of the intensive use of cereal grains,
a use which presumably preceded the beginnings of agriculture, both the
physical environment and human culture were changing rapidly, the cultural
innovations probably occurring in correlation with a marked climatic shift
from colder to warmer.
  The Wurm-Weichselian-Wisconsin period of world-wide temperature
depression, producing massive continental glaciers in the nearer polar regions
of both northern and southern hemispheres, had run its course. The Taurus-
Zagros Mts. of the Near East had been heavily glaciated3, but by 12,000
years ago these glaciers were melting back toward their highland sources.
While the climate on the plateaux inland from the mountains remained some¬
what cool and dry for another 6000 years4, indicating the relative slowness
of the change from the ice-age to a climate typical of the present, man in the
Near East began moving out of caves and living more in open sites after some
12,000 years ago.
  Human culture, as we know it from the recovered remnants of the tools
(mostly stone but occasionally of bone), was changing rapidly; the blades,
burins and scrapers which had dominated the Near Eastern tool kit for the
major portion of the Upper Palaeolithic were being supplanted in part by
microlithic tools, often of such preciseness of shape as to be termed “geo¬
metries ’. These microliths are usually so small that they must have been
hafted to have been used, and their variety and popularity presumably indicate
an increased use of available perishable materials—wood, skins, hair, horn,
and perhaps vegetable foodstuffs.
  We do not know the full story, but we do know that within a period
generally falling between eleven and ten thousand years ago, after approxi¬
mately a thousand years of the intensive use of microliths, men were settling
into semi-permanent villages. We find these present as part of the Natufian
culture5 of the Levant (best exemplified at the site of Mallaha6 on the edge of
Lake Hulah in Palestine s Jordan Valley), at Zawi Chemi Shanidar7 beside
the Greater Zab (a branch of the Tigris) in northern Iraq, and even on the
cold-steppe of the Iranian Plateau at the site of Ganj-Dareh Tepe8.
   All of these near-contemporaneous sites indicate permanent occupation,
and all have some degree of house-building, although the type of structure
is difficult to detect at Zawi Chemi. The Natufian sites and Zawi Chemi have
mortars and pestles and/or querns and hand-held milling stones; at Ganj-
                                 Animal domestication in the Near East    363


Dereh some broken stone was found which may be pieces of querns. The
Natufian sites and Zawi Chemi had sickles (or at least sickle blades) and
microliths; these were not found at Ganj-Dareh. Nowhere had pottery been
made or metal yet utilized.
  In so far as the evidence has been recovered, the Natufian people of the
Levant had the more complex culture, but had no domestic animals9, whereas
the simpler people of Zawi Chemi did. These latter had domestic sheep10.
  The time has come to pause, take stock, and ask ourselves some questions.

1 South-western Asia, although still colder than it is at present, was in a
  period of more rapid warming than had been that of the prior few thousand
  years. Indeed, so rapid was the world-wide climatic warming that the conti¬
  nental glaciers were melting back at such an increased rate that modern
  scientists designate 11,000 b.p.11 (Before Present) as being approximately
  the end of the “ice-age” (Pleistocene) and the beginning of the post-
  Pleistocene (Recent). Studies of pollen, particularly, and of other remains
  from bottom-cores at Lake Zeribar in the Iranian Zagros12 show that
  south-western Asia shared in this world-wide change of climate during and
  following the end of the Pleistocene. Warming is noticeable by about
  14,000 b.p.; particularly for the Zagros at approximately 11,000 b.p., trees
  (primarily oak and pistachio) were beginning to re-invade the foothills, an
  area from which they had been eradicated during the cold of the terminal
  glacial period.

  Questions:

(a) Did this period of climatic change influence and/or accelerate human
   cultural evolution toward the microlithic type of tool production, or did
   the pattern of cultural change have such inherent tendencies as to be
   relatively independent of environmental shifts, so that the microlithic
   phase would have occurred in south-western Asia when it did even if the
    climatic change had not been accelerated ?13
(jb) Was the introduction of microlithic tools merely accompanied by, or
    perhaps directly associated with, a more intensive utilization of the
    available food resources, particularly the seeds of certain grasses (wild
    barley and wheats) ? We have no evidence to answer directly, but the
   introduction of sickles and milling stones in south-western Asia within
    the subsequent few hundred years would suggest some period of use of
    these nutritious grains prior to the invention of specialized tools for
    reaping and milling them.

2 From the Kom Ombo plain of Upper Egypt we have milling stones
  (handstones) and oval or irregular-shaped, slightly concave querns which
  were in use there by or before 13,000 b.p.14 Indeed, the preparation of
  vegetable foods by the use of pounding and grinding stones seems to have
  had a long history in Africa15, and such practices may have already begun
364    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   reed


  some two million years ago, on the evidence of hammer-stones found at
  Makapansgat in Transvaal16. While there is generally little evidence for
  cultural contact between Egypt and the Asiatic Levant in the Late
  Palaeolithic, this priority of typical querns and hand-stones in Egypt by at
  least two thousand years is intriguing.

  Questions:

(a) If milling stones were introduced from Africa, do we need to think of that
      introduction as being correlated with a period of rapid climatic change ?
      Or, possibly, did both the culture and the environment in south-western
      Asia favour utilization by the end of the Pleistocene of milling stones,
    whether introduced or home invented ?
(b) Is the preparation of vegetable food on grinding stones in any way asso¬
      ciated with the first domestication of the hoofed mammals ? If it is, other
      factors are also present, as such domestication did not occur amongst the
      Natufians or, until millennia later, among the Egyptians or Nubians.

  The symbiotic association of a primate species, man, with other mammalian
species, his domesticants, is a part of evolutionary history, and contemplation
of the biological factors which allowed or influenced that history is as neces¬
sary as is consideration of the environmental and cultural factors.
  The earliest domesticants were mammals of the Orders Carnivora (dogs)
or Artiodactyla (pigs, sheep, goats, cattle). The last three of these five are
ruminants from one family, the Bovidae. Each of the five and each wild
ancestor had in common a well-developed intra-specific social fife17, which
has undoubtedly been of aid in their adjustments to living with members of
another species. Two of them, dog and pig, have the ability to eat a wide
variety of plant and animal materials, including offal and carrion: the bovids,
in company with all ruminants, consume materials such as leaves or grass not
directly available as food to man.
  Of the wild ancestors, the cattle (Bos primigenius) are extinct and so not
available for experimentation. The other four, however, are readily tamed if
caught when young and treated with consideration; wolves and dogs inter¬
breed readily and produce fertile offspring, as do wild and domestic pigs. I
have no data on the breeding of domestic and wild goats, but would expect
them to do so, in as much as their physical similarities are such that we include
them in the same species, Capra hircus. Similarly I would expect that any
Old World sheep, all of which are now often put in the single species Ovis
ammon, would mate successfully with any domestic sheep.
   Judging from evidence of the bones exhumed from early prehistoric
village-farming sites in the Near East, the dog was seemingly never an
important factor in the economy, and the domestic pig was presumably only
sligbdy more important; at least the bones of these two domesticants are
rare in comparison with those of sheep and goat. Indeed, in many sites, bones
                                    Animal domestication in the Near East   365


 of gazelles outnumber those of pigs. The possibility remains of course that
 the gazelles were tamed and kept in herds, to be killed as needed, but we have
 no evidence of this.
   The failure of any vertebrate to have evolved an enzyme or enzymes to
 digest cellulose remains an enigma in the study of biochemical evolution.
 This failure, however, has meant that cellulose, one of the most common
organic materials in the terrestrial world, has been denied to all vertebrate
herbivores as a direct source of energy. Only by evolving internal fermenta¬
tion vats, often quite complex in structure and function, can a mammal
utilize cellulose; in such vats, anaerobic bacteria (aided in some instances
by certain Protozoa) process the ingested food and break down the cellulose
to simpler molecules which are then available to the mammal’s digestive
system.
   The most efficient of such fermentation-vats are those which have evolved
anterior to the intestine, by modification of the stomach or of the stomach
plus adjacent parts of the oesophagus ; of these the ruminants (camels, deer,
giraffes, bovids) are the best known, but others (hippopotamus, kangaroos,
and possibly some rodents and primates) have independently evolved similar
anatomical and physiological specializations18, but without rumination.
   Cud-chewing, thus, is not the important factor in cellulose utilization,
but seemingly is an auxiliary device, evolved in the ruminants, which increases
the efficiency of the fermentation-vat. Some other mammals (the horse and
other perissodactyls, pigs, rabbits, and many rodents) have evolved a fer-
mentation-vat in the caecum, posterior to the small intestine. This relatively
inefficient arrangement may well be a factor in the gradual near-replacement
since the Oligocene of Perissodactyia and Suina by ruminants.
  A secondary advantage to having a fermentation-vat anterior to the true
stomach, known to be true at least for ruminants, is that urea can be secreted
from the blood into the stomach, thus recycling the body’s nitrogen, with the
result that the animal can survive on low-nitrogen fodder. Another advantage
is that the bacteria produce all tire necessary vitamins, except A and D, a
situation which again allows the animals to survive on what would generally
be regarded as a sub-minimal diet.
  Two concepts, one merely of interest but the other of value to our thinking,
emerge from the above considerations of ruminant physiology. The first is
that, while the ruminants eat roughage (grass, leaves, etc.) they do not live
directly from this ingested material; for the most part the micro-organisms in
tne internal fermentation-vat consume that food, but the ruminant lives then
on the by-products of bacterial metabolism and on the surplus population
of the micro-organisms. A thought more valuable to the solution of problems
concerning the beginnings of domestication is that ruminants were, by the
very nature of their anatomical and physiological organization, pre-adapted
to survive on food high in cellulose, which is not directly available to man or
dog, and can be utilized only inefficiently by pigs.
366     Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   REED


  Dog, man, and pig are, however, direct competitors for food; even wolves,
ancestors of dogs are (in common with many of the Canidae), much more
omnivorous than many people realize. It is true that pigs and dogs in pre¬
historic times, as well as today, might seek out food (earthworms, acorns,
bulbs for pigs; carrion, camp scraps for dogs) not ordinarily eaten by man,
but none of these food items was impossible for man to eat, and many of them
were sometimes eaten by him. Particularly under conditions of scarcity was
man in direct competition with two of his early domesticants and might even
rob the dog of its wild prey. Furthermore, man would derive more energy
from direct consumption of such food than he would by diverting it to pig
or dog and then eating them. Only in a community where there is an excess
of human food can pigs and dogs be tolerated as a part of the biosocial
community. Thus to cycle grain through a pig before consumption by man
is to lose more than three-fourths of the potential energy originally present
in the grain19, although man may gain to a lesser degree by the concentration
of the protein and by the aesthetic pleasure derived from eating meat.
  With early man’s bovid domesticants there was typically no necessity,
and in practice little possibility, of competition for food. Zeuner20 has termed
these animals the “crop-robbers”, and that they undoubtedly were when wild,
but once under human control they could be kept away from the fields until
after the harvest. The basic point is that ruminants in general and sheep,
goats and cattle in particular (to limit our discussion to the prehistoric Near
East) eat materials such as dry grass, leaves, straw, twigs, etc., with green
fodder when available, which would be a starvation diet for man, dog, or pig.
The domestic bovid (as well as domestic camels and reindeer, later in time)
is thus a converter of cellulose-rich materials, otherwise unavailable to man,
into carbohydrates, fats, and proteins by way of milk and flesh, and is also a
converter of those same materials, generally useless otherwise, into such
valuable commodities as hides, hair, and wool. In time, the dung, particularly
of cattle, also came to be utilized, both as fuel for humans and as a fertilizer
for the fields.
      In summary, the ability to survive on a diet high in cellulose and low in
 proteins is a pre-adaptive factor in the successful domestication of bovids
 by early villagers and later of camels and reindeer by nomads. (The same
 primary adaptations, too, are of course present in those camelids, llama and
 alpaca, which were later and independently domesticated in South America.)
 These factors, i a multi-chambered “stomach” with a fermentation-vat
 anterior to the functional digestive tract; 2 rumination; and 3 recycling of
 nitrogen from urea, in correlation with the various anatomical similarities
 and the evidence of the fossil record, indicate to me a common ancestry for
 the Ruminantia (including the camels) by the middle of the Eocene or ear her.
 Thus the beginnings of the physiological adaptations which allowed sheep,
 goats, and cattle to survive under conditions of probably minimum diet and
                                  Animal domestication in the Near East     367


poor care in early Recent villages had had their evolutionary origins, in
however preliminary form, some fifty million years earlier.
  Undoubtedly the ruminants’ neural and endocrine adaptations for sociabil¬
ity, and their anatomical and physiological adaptations for high cellulose
and low protein diet, had been perfected for millions of years prior to the
evolution of any anthropoid biped identifiable as Homo; why then were no
ruminants—or the omnivorous pigs or the semi-omnivorous wolves for that
matter—not domesticated earlier in human prehistory ?
  The animals were obviously ready, but man was not. Since by the time
we are considering, c. 12,000 to 11,000 years ago, modern man had been the
only type present for some 25,000 years, the changes in men necessary to
bring them to a state of readiness to domesticate animals must have been
primarily cultural. Some factor had to tip the balance of behaviour to change
them from hunters of wild animals to keepers and defenders of tame ones.
  We cannot prove that relatively rapid climatic change was a direct or
indirect factor in the origin of cultivation and domestication, but the environ¬
mental change may indeed have been an important even if indirect influence.
Climatic warming certainly meant a slow but continuous shift of vegetational
zones upward on hill and mountain, and a correlated slow movement of animal
populations to maintain themselves in the environments in which they could
exist. These biological changes, depending upon end-of-Pleistocene warming,
may well have stimulated cultural innovations in south-western Asia, quite a 9
did floral and faunal changes in Europe at this same time. We know that in the
Near East, within a period of little more than a thousand years, microliths
were invented or introduced, people began to move out of caves and build
villages of various types, people began reaping and milling wild cereals, people
began cultivating cereals, and animals became domesticated. (Not all of these
events necessarily occurred in the order designated, as the sequence was
different in some places and some events occurred simultaneously.)          -—
  I believe that, on the basis of present evidence, a primary requirement for
the earliest domestication of the ruminants, and for pigs, is that man settled
down to village fife. A necessity for village life is an established food source
for man, which, by the invariable association of early villages with milling
stones, would mean dependence upon cereal grain, acorns, or some such
highly nutritious plant food which could be gathered in quantity, fragmented
or powdered, dried if need be, and stored.12
   I believe that the archaeological record, although incomplete as yet, is in
preliminary agreement with the above proposition, but many sites in different
environmental areas, from the Jordan’s mouth to the plateaux of Iran and
Anatolia, will have to be dug meticulously and have their discoveries analysed
carefully to test the hypothesis.
  Villages with housing and milling stones do not necessarily have to have
had cultivated grains and/or domesticated animals. Mallaha and other
Natufian settlements seemingly did not, nor did the sites of Mureybat and
368    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   reed


Bouqras, on the Euphrates in northern and eastern Syria, respectively22.
At Mureybat, seventeen occupation levels, dated between 10,200 B.P. and
9500 b.p., succeeded each other; at Bouqras the early level is thought to be
coincident with the PPNA settlement at Jericho and the village persisted late
enough to have coarse, unpainted pottery. The C-14 determinations are
8240 ± 100 to 7840 ± 60. The villages seemingly maintained themselves
completely by hunting and gathering, with some evidence for animal hus¬
bandry at Bouqras at the very end of its existence.
  Palestine remains an enigma in this early history of animal domestication.
The problem has been discussed particularly by Perrot23 and by Ducos24.
The basic fact remains, after considerable investigation, that cereal cultivation
and animal domestication cannot be demonstrated for much of Palestine
(particularly the upper Jordan Valley) and southern Syria prior to the late
fifth millennium B.c. Between c. 8000 b.p. and perhaps c. 6500 b.p., an occupa¬
tional hiatus of fifteen htmdred years seemingly exists, as if Palestine had been
deserted. Perrot suggests a period of desiccation, to correlate in part with the
Boreal Period of Europe (c. 9500-7600 B.P.). However, the chronological
synchrony is not close, and one suspects that the extremes of environmental
change necessary to have caused such human desertion cannot have occurred;
even if the population abandoned their villages for the most part, and
abandoned Jericho also (as seems to have happened), Palestine must have
been occupied, and I suggest occupied by people who had some domestic
mammals even if only goats or goats and sheep. We must remember that,
prior to this supposed cultural hiatus, and in the millennium between 9000 and
8000 b.p., Beidha (at the southern end of the Dead Sea drainage) had culti¬
vated barley25 and probably also had domestic goats26 at the same time. The
people of Jericho, later in the same millennium, seem definitely to have had
cultivated barley2' and perhaps reared domestic goats28; the evidence on this
latter point is being re-evaluated by Clutton-Brock and we must delay any
decision until her results are known. However, in that same millennium,
domestic goats have been reported from El Khiam29, a site in the Wadi
Khareitoun between Bethlehem and the Dead Sea. With goats and barley
known from the lower part of the drainage of the Dead Sea after 9000 b.p.,
and cuJtivated wheat at Jericho c. 8000 b.p.30, I cannot believe that cultivation
and domestication were absent from Palestine until 6500 b.p. The evidence
must exist, yet to be found in spite of the lack of success of careful search
already made for it.



       Summaries of individual species

In my previous reviews on prehistoric domestication in the ancient Near
East    I tried to weigh the evidence as then existing, and decided that many
prior statements on the subject could not be accepted. The result was that the
                                    Animal domestication in the Near East     369


earliest known representatives of each of the domesticants in many areas
were necessarily put at a time obviously some thousands of years later than
that domestication had occurred. I believe that the resulting practice, of
demanding proof of domestication before accepting claim for it as valid, was a
healthy one, and the intervening decade has seen numerous workers who have
helped to fill the chronological voids I had left.
  The dog (Canis familiaris): An increasing number of behavioural studies
confirm the relationship between dog and wolf, as based on morphological
similarities, while at the same time excluding the jackal or any other canid
from the dog’s ancestry. Many of these studies of behaviour are included in a
recent issue of the American Zoologist (May 1967) devoted to the subject. A
few points are worth discussing.
  Several authors32 separately considered various aspects of the evolution of
canid behaviour in general or that of wolf and dog in particular. Although
their work was independent, a general consensus emerges that the behaviour
of wolf and dog differs from that of other members of the family primarily
in the possession of adaptations to increase sociability and decrease friction,
competition, and fighting in the group. My own further conclusion is that
•such behaviour can only have evolved in the free-living pack-life of the wolf,
to be then inherited and largely retained by the domestic dog throughout that
animal’s relatively short span of existence since first domesticated.
  The rearing of tame wolves is not new, but Woolpy and Ginsberg33 have
analysed the problem by experiments. Before six weeks of age, wolf pups
show no fear of man, and indeed are usually all friendliness, with much tail-
wagging, nosing, licking, and exploratory play-biting34. After six or seven
weeks of age, taming becomes increasingly difficult, although seemingly a
wolf of any age can be “socialized” to accept man as a comrade if one has
the time and patience. The important aspect which emerges from these
experiments, and from the description of the rearing of a wolf-pup to
socialized adulthood35, is that pups acquired prior to six weeks of age and
hand-reared would behave toward man much as a large dog does.
  There are some few behavioural patterns of adult tamed wolves not found
in dogs, but the latter of course have been subjected to artificial selection, and
at least one action selected against may well have been the affectionate
muzzle-bite greeting of the tamed wolf36. Additionally, Scott31 made the im¬
portant suggestion that selection in the dog has been “for a highly protected
neonatal existence”, which I translate to mean the retention of the trustful
and friendly behaviour of the wolf pup. (Different breeds of dogs vary of
course, due to special selection in each, and individual training and experience
is another variable.) Certainly the experiment with Elsa the lioness shows how
much of the wildness of a large social carnivore can be lost in one generation
when the individual is hand-reared by humans38.
 Prehistoric experiments of raising wolf pups may have been tried dozens or
hundreds of times before a breeding population was established which
370   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    reed

remained in the human environment, but there would seem now no difficulty
in believing in the feasibility of this process of domestication of dog from
wolf.
   Fentress39 made the concluding statement that dogs were not derived from
wolves that exist today, but that primitive man domesticated his first dogs
from a common ancestor. This statement will appeal to, and be repeated by,
dog-lovers and people in dog-clubs, who have an emotional bias against
accepting the living wolf as typical of the ancestor of their pets, but in
actuality the population (or populations) of Old World wolves from which
dogs were derived some 11,000 or more years ago were probably little
different, except possibly by slightly larger size, than are the wolves of those
same regions today.
   Scott suggested that dogs may have been domesticated only once, since the
up-curved tail or the curly tail held over the back is characteristic of all dogs
but not of wolves. He proposed that the mutation occurred early in the
history of dogs and was retained by artificial selection. A common ancestry
of all dogs would necessarily be an ancient one in the history of domestication,
to have dogs at Star Carr in England by approximately 9500 years ago40, in
Anatolia419000 years ago, and in Idaho by 10,400 b.p.42 There remains work
to be done, but the major outlines of the domestication of the dog do seem
to be more discernable through the mists of antiquity than was true a few
years ago.
   For south-western Asia, I had previously43 indicated doubt concerning
proof of the presence of domestic dogs until a relatively late date. The prob¬
lem now is happily being clarified by the discovery of dogs at £ayonii44 in
south-western Anatolia, a site dated at c. 9000 b.p.45 Further examination, by
Miss Lawrence and myself, of the remains of the large canids from Jarmo,
about which I was puzzled previously46 reveals that they too undoubtedly
represent dogs and not wolves.
   Zeuner47 had published on the presence of dogs at Jericho from the lower
levels of the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B period (c. 8300 ? b.p. as I extrapolate
the radiocarbon determinations there). With the evidence of earlier dogs
already in south-western Asia, their presence in the PPNB levels, and even in
the earlier PPNA, would seem reasonable. However, Clutton-Brock48 has
re-examined the canid material from Jericho and has not been able to certify
that any of the bones or teeth are definitely from dogs and not from the local
wolf. Obviously, we need more material, which need demands more excava¬
tion.
   The fact remains that bones of dogs from prehistoric villages in south¬
western Asia are generally rare, but we now must realize that such rarity does
not necessarily preclude the presence of dogs in those same villages. Probably
dogs were not eaten, and possibly dead dogs were not allowed to lie in the
village, so few of their bones are preserved for us.
   Possibly the earliest drawing of a dog is that represented in a hunting scene
                                   Animal domestication in the Near East     371

from level III (c. 7500 b.p.) at £atal Huyiik49 in south-central Anatolia. The
“dog” however would probably not have been recognized as such if out of the
context of the scene of a man hunting deer, as the actual figure of the small
carnivore could as easily be that of a mustelid or viverrid.
  The pig (Sus scrofa): No emotional problems arise in accepting the wild
pig as the ancestor of the domestic pig, nor do we find international symposia
convened to discourse on the comparative behaviour of wild and domestic
pigs, and on the problems in taming the former. I can, however, report that
the striped young of the wild pig, two of which I kept for several weeks at
Jarmo in 1955, behave exactly as do the unstriped young of domestic pigs,
and they smell the same, too.
  Stampfli50 has given a good resume of the prehistoric domestication of the
pig in south-western Asia, which need not be repeated here since his studies
will be published. He found that pigs, prior to the period of Sumerian cities,
were found at numerous sites but rarely represented more than 5% of the
bones of food animals; they were however more numerous (25%) at Matarrah.
  Stampfli verified the unpublished work of Flannery51 that remains of only
wild pigs were recovered from the lower, pre-ceramic levels at Jarmo, and that
there had been a transition to smaller domestic pigs (with some large pre¬
sumably hunted pigs still remaining) in those upper layers with pottery. The
implication, thus, is that domestication of the pig was a process happening at
Jarmo c. 8500 b.p., but not a process necessarily limited to that site. Actually,
domestic pigs were already present, although a minor part of the village fauna,
at Qayonii, several hundreds of years earlier in south-western Anatolia52.
These latter are the earliest domestic pigs known, but we should not thereby
imagine that they necessarily will retain that distinction. However, if settled
villages were a prerequisite for domestication of artiodactyls, pigs at Qayonii
may be close in time to that period of origin.
  The sheep (Ovis aries) and the goat (Capra hircus): The sheep identified
by Perkins53 remain the earliest-known domestic animals, perhaps in correla¬
tion with the fact that the site, Zawi Chemi, is one of the earliest definite
villages (c. 10,800 b.p.). Domestic sheep are now known also from £ayonii,
c. 9000 b.p.54 However, to illustrate the continuing problems of identification
of broken pieces of bones of Caprinae as recovered from prehistoric sites,
Stampfli55 could not be certain that any of the sheep bones found at Jarmo
were from domestic sheep, although he thinks they probably were. In any
case, goats seemingly were much more important than sheep at Jarmo,
outnumbering them by a wide margin.
  The time of introduction of domestic animals into Africa has long been a
gnawing problem, but recently Higgs56 has presented some definite evidence
from the upper (neolithic) levels of the cave of Haua Ftea in Cyrenaica,
Libya. Again, in illustration of the difficulties inherent in zoo-archaeology,
the butchering practices of the neolithic people seem to have resulted in
their discarding outside the cave the taxonomically diagnostic bones, so that
372   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   reed

Higgs was unable to distinguish sheep from goats57. (His problem was further
complicated by the presence in the same deposits of the closely-related wild
audad or “Barbary Sheep”, Ammotragus.) However, he definitely stated that
domestic sheep or goats or both were living in Cyrenaica before c. 6800 B.P.,
and possibly as early as 8400 b.p. Since both domestic sheep and goats were
well known in south-western Asia by this earlier time, and goats presumably
this early or earlier were at Beidha58 in the southern end of the Dead Sea
drainage, there would seem to be little difficulty in accepting the probability
that domestic goats and/or sheep could have been herded by easy stages
across Sinai (not such a desert then, certainly, as it is now, and not such a
desert now as many believe59) and the northern coast of Egypt into the
mountains of Cyrenaica. They could also have been moved up the Nile
valley and into the oasis of Fayum, but we have no evidence of their presence
in these areas until later.
   The earliest history of domestic goats in south-western Asia is not much
more clear than when I wrote on the subject ten years ago. They are the
dominant food animal at Jarmo60, and are listed as being abundant in the
earliest or Bus Mordeh phase at Tepe Ah Kosh, Deh Luran, Iranian Khuzis-
tan, where their identification as domesticants is based on the high proportion
of yearlings there61. Since the lower levels of this site may date well before
9000 b.p., these domestic goats, already outside the area of their natural range
in the mountains, may represent the earliest record yet known. Tepe Ali Kosh
is one site where domestic goats would definitely seem to precede sheep, as
the latter are reported only as possibly present in the second phase at the
site, but then become more numerous later, as indeed also do the goats.
  Lawrence cannot be certain that domestic goats were present at (^ayonii,
c. 9000 B.P., but their wide-spread distribution within a relatively short time
after, from Beidha62 (where there are no native true goats) to Khuzistan63
would imply the beginnings of their domestication at least by 9000 b.p., if
not earlier.
  Domestic goats, but not sheep, were reported from the levels of Pre-
Pottery Neolithic B at Jericho64, but on limited evidence. While I had pre¬
viously accepted this as a valid record, I am happy that Clutton-Brock is
now making a thorough study of all the bones from Jericho, and hopefully
we shall soon have available the results of her investigations. The bones
from numerous other sites in south-western Asia also await study, or have
been studied but the results not yet published. Some of these studies may
change the pattern as here presented for the prehistoric chronology of domestic
sheep and goats, and for other species also.
  Cattle (Bos taurus): Accumulating evidence indicates that cattle were the
last of the lour major food-animals of the prehistoric Near East to have been
domesticated. Indeed, the earliest known cattle for which we have clear
evidence ol domestication, c. 8500 b.p., were not in south-western Asia;
they were Irom the site of Argissa-Maghula, in Greek Thessaly65. The next
                                    Animal domestication in the Near East      373


oldest site for what seem to be domestic cattie is also in Greece, only a rela¬
tively short distance from the first, at Nea Nikomedeia, in Macedonia66. The
date here is c. 8100 b.p. We do not know whether cattle were first domesticated
in south-eastern Europe and then moved as domesticants to Asia, or whether
the pattern was in the reverse direction and we have not found the early sites
in Asia as yet, or whether independent centres of domestication of cattle
occurred, sparked perhaps by people who travelled in trade and saw what
others were doing.
  Possibly there was more of an act of purposeful domestication in bringing
cattle into the villages than there had been with the earlier domesticants.
After some 2000 years of increasingly intense domestication of sheep and
goats particularly, the thought may have occurred that the big wild cattle,
hunted only occasionally I would say, from the record of the sparsity of their
bones in most village sites of the period, might be worth taming and keeping.
I know of no way of proving or disproving such a supposition.
  Isaac67, following the pioneer ideas of Eduard Hahn in the late nineteenth
century, has argued that domestication of cattle emerged from religious
practices based on awe, fear, and admiration of the great bulls, which some¬
times stood two metres at the withers. He has proposed that cattle might have
been driven into large enclosures, from which certain males were isolated
for sacrifice as occasion demanded, but leaving others free to breed. Gradually
those which did not meet the standards of the sacrificial animals would be
diverted to other purposes.
  While admiring Isaac’s broad scholarship and skilful presentation, I had
previously tended to discount this religious approach to the origins of cattle
domestication on the basis that his supporting data were drawn almost
entirely from late prehistoric representations or from representations and
writings of historical periods. All of this evidence, while definitely portraying
cattle in religious contexts, was too long after the fact, I thought, to have
bearing on the actual time of domestication. Additionally, there seemed little
hope of finding archaeological evidence which would shed light on such a
theory.
   I am less certain than I used to be that no archaeological evidence can be
found, and the reason for tending to change my mind is the obvious impor¬
tance of the cattle, and what certainly seems to be a cattle-cult, at Qatal
Hiiyiik68. Here perhaps is the place to test, with actual stratified archaeological
material, the possibility of religious practices involving wild cattle leading to
the use of cattle as the servant of man69.
  The introduction of cattle into village-farming and town-farming economy
may have caused some important cultural changes, although not necessarily
immediately. Cattle were the first domestic animals capable of pulling a
plough. The earliest representations of ploughs are from Warka IV (I am
quoting Isaac), c. 5200 ? B.P.70 The question is, how much earlier were ploughs
lated on the basis of a half-life of 5570 years.
                                       Animal domestication in the Near East       375


intensively used ? Lacking remains of ploughs, which were wooden, archaeol¬
ogists might well look for changes in settlement-patterns and for possible
population increases after the domestication of cattle. These changes could
have been initiated by more intensive cultivation following the introduction of
the plough. Possibly too some evidence of stables, not so necessary for the
smaller artiodactyls, will be found coincident with the appearance of cattle.
Today amongst some of the mountain nomads of south-western Asia, cattle
are used as pack animals. Is there any archaeological evidence of increased
volume of trade after the appearance of cattle ?
  As mentioned, domestic cattle are found later in south-western Asia than
are sheep and goats. The first known Asiatic domestic cattle, those reported
from Tepe Sabz at Deh Luran in Iranian Khuzistan71, may have been as
early as 7450 b.p. Another early date is for the site of Banahilk, a Halafian
site in the mountains of northern Iraq, as I stated in 196172. The date of
Banahilk is c. 7000 b.p.73 Stampfli74 could not find any evidence of domestic
cattle at Jarmo or Matarrah, and in the ‘Amuq sequence near Antioch he
cannot discern domestic cattle prior to Phase C, and then only tentatively.
Only with Phase D (c. 6200 b.p.) does he find definite evidence of domestic
cattle.
  Thus the problem of the origin and spread of domestic cattle, as with other
problems in the prehistory of south-western Asia, presents us with a mystery.
The cattle are found first in Greece, and then in far-distant Khuzistan, and
then in northern Iraq, but not until later on the eastern Mediterranean coast.
However, numerous Anatolian sites (Hacilar, £atal Hiiyiik, Suberde) have
sequences in the time range of that of the early cattle in Greece. From
Suberde, at least, some 25,000 bones were salvaged75, and the study of these
and of the bones from other Anatolian sites should do much to unravel the
mysteries of early domestication of cattle in south-western Asia76.



          Notes
          1 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and
            barley, Science, 153, pp. 1074-80; Zohary, D., this volume, pp. 47-66.
          2 Radulesco, C. and Samson, P. (1962). Sur un centre de domestication du
            mouton dans le Mesolithique de la grotte “La Adam” en Dobrogea,
            Z. Tierzucht ZiichtBiol, 76, pp. 282-320.
          3 Wright, H. E., Jr. (1961). Pleistocene glaciation in Kurdistan, Eiszeitalter
            und Gegenwart, 12, pp. 131-64.
          4 Wright, H. E., Jr. (1968). Natural environment of early food production
            north of Mesopotamia, Science, 161, pp. 334-9.
          5 Garrod, D. A. E. (1957). The Natufian culture: The life and economy of
            Mesolithic people in the Near East, Proc. Brit. Acad., 43, pp. 211-27.
          6 Perrot, J. (1966). Le gisement Natoufien de Mallaha (Eynan), Israel,
            U Anthropologie, 70, pp. 437-83.
          7 Solecki, R. L. (1964). Zawi Chemi Shanidar, a post-Pleistocene village
376   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication         REED


         site in northern Iraq, Rep. Vlth Inter. Congr. Quaternary, Warsaw, 1961,
         IV, pp. 405-12.
       8 Young, T. C., Jr. and Smith, P. E. L. (1966). Research in the pre¬
         history of central western Iran, Science, 153, pp. 386-91; The site of
          Ganj-Dareh Tepe, on the “inner” (north-eastern) side of the Zagros
         range, would seem to have been too early, some ten thousand five hundred
         years ago, and at too high an altitude, which implies harsh winter cold at
         that period, to have been a permanent village with definite house-walls.
         The earliest carbon 14 determination may be found to be erroneous, or—
         we will have to change our minds as to what is right and proper for pre¬
         historic peoples to have done. We have had to change before.
       9 The Natufian “dog”, which had become firmly entrenched in some books
         and monographs, was shown, independently, by Glutton-Brock, J. (1962).
         Near Eastern canids and the affinities of the Natufian dog, Z. Tierziicht
         ZuchtBiol., 76, pp. 326-33; and Reed, C. A. (1961). Osteological evidences
         for prehistoric domestication in south-western Asia, Z. Tierziicht
         ZuchtBiol., 76, pp. 31-8, to be within the range of variation of the local
         Palestinian wolf.
      10 Perkins, D., Jr. (1964). Prehistoric fauna from Shanidar, Iraq, Science,
         144, pp. 1565-6.
      ill use dates in b.p. (Before Present), in preference to the common practice
         of stating them as B.c. (Before Christ), because the latter usage indicates
         to most people an accuracy and validity which we cannot yet know in pre¬
         historic studies. The “radiocarbon year” is not necessarily the same length
         as the calendric year, being sometimes longer and sometimes shorter.
         There is considerable literature on this subject which I have summarized
         (1966). Organic remains from the Yale University Nubian Expedition’s
         archaeological sites DI-21B and WO-2A, with a discussion of the radio¬
         carbon determinations, Postilla,Yale Peabody Museum, 102, pp. 35-46, for
         myself and others who do not understand everything published in
         journals of geophysics.
      12 van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E., Jr. (1963). Preliminary pollen studies at
         Lake Zeribar, Zagros Mountains, south-western Iran, Science, 140, pp.
         65—7; Wright, H. E., Jr. (1966). Stratigraphy of lake sediments and the
         precision of the palaeoclimatic record, in Royal Meteorological Society
         Proceedings of the International Symposium on World Climate from 8000 to
         0 B.C. London, pp. 157-73; Wright, H. E., Jr., McAndrews, J. H. and
         van Zeist, W. (1967). Modern pollen rain in western Iran, and its relation
         to plant geography and Quaternary vegetational history, J. Ecology, 55,
         pp. 415-43; Megard, R. O. (1967). Late-Quaternary Cladocera of Lake
         Zeribar, western Iran, Ecology, 48, pp. 179-89; van Zeist, W. (1967).
         Late Quaternary vegetation history of western Iran, Rev. Palaeobot. and
         Palynol., 2, pp. 301-11.
      13 The proposal that a period of rapid climatic change coincided with, and
         may have had some stimulating effect on, the change from hunting and
         gathering cultures to early agricultural and/or herding ones runs counter
         to the thought of the past fifteen years that relatively little climatic change
         had occurred in most of south-western Asia at the close of the Pleistocene.
         As one of the proponents (Reed, C. A. and Braidwood, R. J. (i960).
         Toward the reconstruction of the environmental sequence in north¬
         eastern Iraq, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, 31, pp. 163-73) of
         that theory, I do wish to call attention to the fact that Braidwood and I
         stated that the mammalian fossils upon which we were then basing our
         conclusions would not be as accurate palaeoclimatic indicators as would
         pollen, when and if a pollen record could be found. It has now, with
         much supporting evidence. I, for one, bow to Lake Zeribar, although I
          ave no intention ol reviving any suggestion of the desiccation theory of
                                 Animal domestication in the Near East        377


       animal domestication. For a list of references to the recent theory of
       climatic continuity in south-western Asia, see Hole, F. (1966). Investigat¬
       ing the origins of Mesopotamian civilization. Science, 153, pp. 605-11,
       footnote 8. I agree with Hole that true urbanization probably was little
       influenced by any climatic changes, although obviously such an early site
       as Jericho may now be more explicable than some of us have found it
       priorly, on the basis that the climate during the Pre-Pottery periods (A
       and B) was probably cooler, even if not wetter than it is today.
  14 Vignard, E. (1923). Une nouvelle industrie lithique, le “Sebilien”, Bull.
       Inst.fran. Arch, orient., 22, pp. 1-76, pi. XIV bis; Reed, C. A., BaumhoflF,
       M. A., Butzer, K. W. Walter, H. and Boloyan, D. S. (1967). Preliminary
       report on the archaeological aspects of the research of the Yale University
      Prehistoric Expedition to Nubia, 1962-3, Antiq. Dept. Egypt, Fouille en
      Nubie, (1961-1963), pp. 145-56; Butzer, K. W. and Hansen, C. L.
      (1968). Desert and River in Nubia. Madison, particularly pp. 135-6 and
      170-2.
  15 Clark, J. D. (1965). The later Pleistocene cultures of Africa, Science, 150,
      pp. 833-47.
  16 Maguire, B. (1965). Foreign pebble pounding artifacts in the breccias and
      the overlying vegetation soil at Makapansgat Limeworks, A. Afr. Arch.
      Bull., 20, pp. 117-30; Dart, R. A. (1965). Pounding as a process and the
      producer of other artifacts, S. Afr. Arch. Bull., 20, pp. 141-7.
 17 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, pp.
      1-560.
 18 Moir, R. J. (1965). The comparative physiology of ruminant-like
     animals, in Dougherty, R. W. et al (eds.) Physiology of Digestion in the
     Ruminant. Washington.
 19 Cottrell, F. (1955). Energy and Society. New York. p. 20.
 20 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). ibid.
 21 The field experiments of Harlan, J. R. (1967). A wild wheat harvest in
     Turkey, Archaeology, 20, pp. 197-201. indicate the necessity of having a
     somewhat permanent place of living once harvesting of cereals had become
     common. Working in south-western Turkey where wild einkorn wheat
     grew densely, Harlan used a prehistoric flint sickle and harvested the
     equivalent of two pounds or more of clean grain per hour. In the three-
     week period typically available for such harvesting of wild wheats a family
     could have gathered enough seed to last them for a year. With some 330-50
    pounds of grain per person (equal to a ton or more for a family of six), the
    harvesters were obviously going to have to store their newly-gained food
    and to stay around to protect and eat it. The first simple villages may have
    grown up around such storage places.
22 van Loon, M. N. (1966). Mureybat: An early village in inland Syria,
    Archaeology, 19, pp. 215-16; van Loon, M. N. (1966). The Euphrates
    Valley Expedition, Report for 1965-66, The Oriental Institute, Univ. of
    Chicago, pp. 17-22; de Contenson, H. (1966). Decouvertes recentes
    dans le domaine du Neolithique en Syrie, L’Anthropologie, 70, pp. 388-91.
23 Perrot, J. (1967). Munhata, Bible et Terre Saint, 93, pp. 4-16; also
    Personal communication.
24 Ducos, P. (1965). Contribution a l’etude de l’histoire de la domestication:
    etude des faunes post-paleolithiques de Palestine, du Mesolithique a l’Age
    du Bronze. These de Doctor at de Sciences de VUniversite de Bordeaux.
    pp. 1-324. (I have not seen the original of this thesis, but Dr. Ducos
    very kindly sent me an extended summary of his results; Ducos, P., this
    volume, pp. 265-75.
25 Helbaek, H. (1966). Pre-Pottery Neolithic farming at Beidha, Palestine
    Exploration Quarterly, Jan.-June 1966, pp. 61-6; Helbaek, H. (1966).
378   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication        reed


          Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20,
         pp. 350-60.
      26 Perkins, D., Jr. (1966). The fauna from Madamagh and Beidha, Palestine
         Exploration Quarterly, Jan.-June 1966, pp. 66-7.
      27 Hopf, M., this volume, pp. 355—9.
      28 Zeuner, F. E. (1955). The goats of early Jericho, Palestine Exploration
          Quarterly, 1955, pp. 70-86.
      29 Ducos, P. (1966). Los huesos de animales, in Gonzales-Etchegarroy, J.
         Excavacions en le Terrazee le El Khiem (Jordania), 2.
      30 Hopf, M., this volume, ibid.
      31 Reed, C. A. (1959). Animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
          Science, 130, pp. 1629-39; Reed, C. A. (i960). A review of the archae¬
         ological evidence on animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
         in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. Prehistoric Investigations in Iraqi
         Kurdestan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, Oriental Institute,
         Chicago, 31, pp. 119-45> Fig- 7-
      32 Schenkel, R. (1967). Submission: Its features and function in the wolf
         and dog, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 319-29; Kleiman, D. G. (1967). Some aspects
         of social behaviour in the Canidae, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 365-72; Scott, J. P.
         (1967). The evolution of social behaviour in dogs and wolves, Amer. Zool.,
         7, pp. 373-81.
      33 Woolpy, J. H. and Ginsberg, B. E. (1967). Wolf socialization: A study of
         temperament in a wild social species, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 357-63.
      34 I can testify to the truth of this innate friendliness of young wolves, as I
         once handled four of them in northern Iraq; their parents had been
         killed by a Kurdish hunter, who was taking the young to Kirkuk to be
         sold. (Such practices, even though uncommon, must inject a certain
         minimum of genes from wolves into the population of Iraqi dogs.) The
         pups—appealing balls of fur some four or five weeks old—were all
         friendliness with no sign of distrust in spite of having been separated from
         home and parents, carried for some hours in a bag, and then dumped out
         helter-skelter on the ground. One had lost a forepaw when captured, but
         not even such an injury evoked hostility.
      35 Fentress, J. C. (1967). Observations on the behavioral development of a
         hand-reared male timber wolf, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 339-51.
      36 Woolpy, J. H. and Ginsberg, B. E. (1967). ibid.
      37 Scott, J. P. (1967). ibid.
      38 Adamson, J. (i960). Born Free, a Lioness of Tzvo Worlds. New York. pp.
          1-220.
      39 Fentress, J. C. (1967). ibid.
      40 Degerbql, M. (1961). On a find of a pre-boreal domestic dog (Canis
         familiaris L.) from Star Carr, Yorkshire, with remarks on other Meso¬
         lithic dogs, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 27, pp. 35-55.
      41 Lawrence B. (In press). Evidences of animal domestication at Cayonii,
         Bull. Turkish Hist. Soc.
      42 Lawrence, B. (1967). Early domestic dogs, Z. Sauget., 32, pp. 44-59.
      43 Reed, C. A. (1961). ibid.
      44 Lawrence, B. (In press), ibid.; Lawrence, B. (1967). ibid.
      45 Braidwood, R. J. (1966). The Prehistoric Project, Report for 1956/66,
          The Oriental Institute, Univ. of Chicago, pp. 24-6.
      46 Reed, C. A. (1961). ibid.
      47 Zeuner, F. E. (1958). Dog and cat in the Neolithic of Jericho, Palestine
         Exploration Quarterly, 1958, pp. 52-5.
      48 Clutton-Brock, J., this volume, pp. 337-45.
      49 Mellaart, J. (1967). Catal Hiiyiik: A Neolithic town in Anatolia. New
         York. pi. 57.
      50 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). 1 he fauna of the prehistoric archaeological sites of
                               Animal domestication in the Near East       379


   Jarmo, Matarrah, Karim Shahir, and the Amouq in south-western Asia.
   (Manuscript to be published by the Oriental Institute, Univ. of Chicago.)
51 Flannery, K. V. (1961). Skeletal and radiocarbon evidence for the start
   and spread of pig domestication. Thesis for the degree of Master of Arts,
    Dept, of Anthropology, Univ. of Chicago.
52 Lawrence, B. (In press), ibid.
53 Perkins, D., Jr. (1964). ibid.
54 Lawrence, B. (In press), ibid.
55 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). ibid.
56 Higgs, E. S. (1967). Early domesticated animals in Libya, in Bishop,
   W. W. and Clark, J. D. (eds.) Background to Evolution in Africa. Chicago,
   pp. 165-73.
57 Prehistoric people often did diabolic things which thwart modern pre¬
    historians.
58 Perkins, D., Jr. (1966). ibid.
59 Darwish M. Al-Far, a Bedouin from Sinai who is now an Egyptian
    geologist, has told me that modern Bedouins often drive sheep from the
    interior of Sinai to towns along the Suez Canal to sell them. Additionally
    he stated that, following winters and springs with more than average
   precipitation, the crossing of the whole of Sinai on foot with flocks of
    sheep and goats would present no trouble.
60 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). ibid.
61 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. (1965). Early agriculture and
   animal husbandry in Deh Luran, Iran, Current Anthropology, 6, pp.
    105-6; Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100.
62 Perkins, D., Jr. (1966). ibid.
63 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. (1965). ibid.; Flannery, K. V. this
   volume, ibid.
64 Zeuner, F. E. (1955). ibid.
65 Boessneck, J. (1962). Die Tierreste aus der Argissa-Magula vom praekera-
   mischen Neolithikum bis zur mittleren Bronzezeit. In Milojcic, V.,
   Boessneck, J. and Hopf, M., Die Deutschen Ausgrabungen auf der Argissa-
   Magula in Thessalien, I. Beitrage zur ur- und friihgeschichtlichen Archae-
   ologie des Mittelmeer-Kulturraumes, 2, pp. 37-99. (Not seen; quoted
   from Stampfli.)
66 Higgs, E. S. (1962). Excavations at the early Neolithic site at Nea Niko-
   medeia, Greek Macedonia (1961 season). Part II. The biological data:
   Fauna, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 28, pp. 271-4, Fig. 3.
67 Isaac, E. (1962). On the domestication of cattle, Science, 137, pp. 195-204.
68 Mellaart, J. (1967). ibid.
69 Additionally, Ducos (1966). ibid., has suggested that the goats which he
   thinks to have been domestic at El Khiam, in southern Palestine, had been
   killed as part of a sacrificial rite. The majority of the goat bones were
   from animals only a month old, and the long bones, delicate at that young
   age, often remained unbroken, as if the animals had not been eaten.
70 Ehrich, R. W. (ed.) (1965). Chronologies in Old World Archaeology.
   Chicago, pp. 1-557.
71 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. (1965). ibid.
72 Reed, C. A. (1961). ibid.
73 Ehrich, R. W. (1965). ibid.
74 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). ibid.
75 Bordaz, J. (1966). Anatolian Research Project, Suberde excavations: Pre¬
   liminary report, New York Univ., Dept, of Classics, Bull., 66-2, pp. 1-3.
76 My field work in south-western Asia was initiated and thereafter en¬
   couraged by Professor Robert Braidwood of the Oriental Institute,
   University of Chicago. To him, and his financial sponsors, I am most
   grateful. My own ideas develop slowly, and indeed may often be borrowed
380   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     reed


        from others without memory of the original source. Both in the field in the
        Nearer Orient and at many conferences and random meetings in the
        United States I have discussed the problems of Near Eastern prehistory
        with Robert and Linda Braidwood, Bruce Howe, Herbert Wright, Patty
        Jo Watson, Barbara Lawrence, Hans Helbaek, Jack Harlan, Frank Hole,
        Kent Flannery, Dexter Perkins and many others.
      RUTH TRINGHAM

      Animal domestication in the Neolithic cultures of the
      south-west part of European U.S.S.R.


My aim in this paper is to present analyses of the animal bone material from a
number of early prehistoric sites in the south-western part of the U.S.S.R.,
since these are only rarely available to research workers in this country (Figs. 4
and 5); I have also tried to indicate their archaeological context (Figs. 1 and 2).
I have not attempted, however, to put forward or support any claims for early
•independent domestication of any animals.
  It may be said for certain that the forest/steppe and steppe north of the
Black Sea in the Ukraine and Moldavian republics is, so far, the region where
domesticated animals first occur on prehistoric sites in the U.S.S.R., apart
from the settlements of the Dzeitun culture in Turkmenia in central Asia.
This was probably a result predominantly of the early prehistoric settlements
of this region being closest to the early agricultural settlements of south-east
Europe, although it seems from the early post-glacial period to have been an
area rich in wild pigs in particular, and also wild cattle.
  In this region a number of claims have been put forward by Soviet
archaeologists for the possible evidence especially in the Crimea and Mol¬
davia for an early independent development of domestication of animals
before the introduction of pottery manufacture, for what may be termed an
“aceramic neolithic” culture. However, before the north Pontic aceramic
neolithic sites are accepted as indubitable proof of an early centre of animal
domestication, it should be questioned firstly whether the sites are as early
as they have been claimed; that is, earlier, than the introduction of a produc¬
tive agricultural economy from western Asia to south-east Europe, as
represented in the Karanovo I/Starcevo/K6ros/Cri§ group of cultures; and
secondly whether the animal bones show definite traces of domestication.
  This applies particularly to the claims for very early domesticated pigs in
the cave sites of the south Crimean mountains: Tas Ayir and Zamil Koba1.
Both caves have late palaeolithic material at the base, overlain by two
mesolithic strata, the earlier referred to as the “Crimean Azilian” industry,
and the later as the “Crimean Tardenoisian” industry. Above these are two
neolithic layers, the lower with a few shreds of coarse undercoated pottery
—
                        Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.     383




Fig 2 Cultural contexts of the sites referred to in the text.


similar to the Kukreks ware of north Crimea, and the upper representing a
culture very similar to the middle phase of the Dnieper-Donetz culture of the
lower and middle Dnieper basins, and may be compared to such sites as
Buzki and Vovnigi. The flint blade industry of both neolithic layers continues
the traditions of the preceding mesolithic layers. Above the neolithic strata,
are layers representing cultures from the Bronze Age to the mediaeval period.
A large number of pig bones have been found in all but the two uppermost
layers. Even in the earliest layers domesticated, as well as wild and undis-
tinguishable immature, animals have been identified.
  It is worth noting, however, the difficulty in distinguishing between wild
and domesticated pigs, since they are easily domesticated and as easily revert
to the wild state2. In the Soviet Union, the distinction is made especially
on a basis of size, the larger animals being identified as wild, and the smaller
animals as domesticated3. Moreover, it has been noted that the wild pigs
excavated in the upper palaeolithic cave settlements were small animals
compared with the large wild pigs of the later, neolithic layers4. As mentioned
above, in these latter layers, the smaller animals have been identified as
384   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    tringham


domesticated. It seems possible, therefore, that there existed in the Crimea
at this time two strains of pig, a small and a large one, both wild. Thus, even if
the stratigraphical evidence of the Crimean cave-sites is regarded as valid, it
seems highly unlikely, at this stage, that the pigs in the lower, mesolithic,
layers represent domesticated animals. It seems more probable that domesti¬
cated pigs do not occur in the Crimea until at least the early neolithic layers,
or even later, when they may also be observed in the lower Dnieper basin.
  However, there is definite evidence for a wide distribution of wild pigs in
this area, and particularly the Crimea itself, since the immediate post-
Pleistocene period; and, moreover, there is evidence for specialized hunting
of wild pigs during this period. In fact, the process of a local domestication
of pigs in the Crimea, as described by Stoljar, may very well have occurred,
but probably at a rather later date than he envisaged5.
  There is, as yet, no evidence for the relative chronological position of the
Crimean Tardenoisian settlements apart from an ante quem date provided
by the later neolithic dates which, as mentioned above, are related to the
middle phase of the Dnieper-Donetz culture6. This phase, by the discovery
of a Tripolye pot at Nikolskii, has been equated chronologically with the
middle phase of the Tripolye culture of the western Ukraine; that is, the
second half of the fourth millennium.
  In the Bug-Dniester basin, until very recently, the earliest evidence for
domesticated animals were the cattle found on sites of the early phase of the
Bug-Dniester culture, at a time contemporary with the earliest agricultural
settlements of Rumania, represented by the Cri§ culture, hi the late sixth/
early fifth millennium. On many sites in this region, the early phase of the Bug-
Dniester culture was preceded by what was termed an “aceramic neolithic”
culture, quite unjustifiably since there was no evidence for the domestication
of any plants or animals; however, its geometric microlithic blade industry,
which seems typologically related to the Crimean Tardenoisian flint industry,
quite clearly provided the antecedents for the flint blade industry of the early
phase of the Bug-Dniester culture. Recently, however, in the lower levels of
two stratified sites in Moldavia, Soroki (Trifautski les land 2), the bones of
domesticated, as well as wild, pig, have been found in association with this
mesolithic or “aceramic neolithic” industry and dated by carbon-14 to the
late sixth millennium B.C., earlier than any dates yet obtained from the earliest
agricultural settlements of south-east Europe, even of Bulgaria7.
   However, it should be noted that in the later phases of the locally-developed
 Bug-Dniester culture, bones from domesticated pigs have not been identified8.
It is conceivable, therefore, that the same situation as that observed in the
Crimea may also exist in the Bug-Dniester basin.
  An independent development of cattle-breeding in the Ukraine was claimed
for the north Pontic steppe, but this is even more dubious. In the lowest
layers ol the stratified site of Kamennaya Mogila, north-west of the Sea of
 Azov, in two aceramic layers, levels I—III and IV—V, again in association with
                                      Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.   385




            mi N13hM9
           (pAalwjblS3MQ
            3A3MIH1 31yi
      X                                                                                 vO
           (StSIUC^MdSlNO                                                               _J     4-1
                                                                                        <c      0
      h    JAIOdlHi. 31V7
                                                                                                C/3
                   3)?d31N<]                                                                    4>
                                                                                                +-■
NP          3A70dlHr<NIW
<                                                                                       <c      C/3

                     unBt                                                               zx      O
            3X70319100 in                                                               _j
                                                                                                O

A             H3133IN0                                                                          c/5
                                                                                                                 cn
            jAiantucciw                                                                        2                 (L)
                                                                                                                 •M
                                                                                                <u
                                                                                                                 C/5
           (>? 3xiodin±                                                                         a,
K                                                                                       o                        £
                      X1»V3                                                             <c                       eg
                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                 r-*
           2J-      (N\/IOS~)
vi/                                                                                             c3
                                                                                                <U
           iNiinonj-ynj                                                                                         "u
      x                                                                                 w       <D
                                                                                                                u
Z              XuJJJOd                                                                                            <L>
  t-                                                                                    v_i^    4—»             i rj
A                HV3UI7
                                                                                               <4-»             V-<
             103 N 3J.V1                                                                        O
 I             ■+ 33dd Ic-J                                                                                      C
           «3i«iN<i-9ne                                                                        , ,               cq
      o                                                                                        •S                c3
                                                                                               *n                a
           103H        X7HV3                                                                    <D               f-
Z *         h?±S3lN(l-9/19
                                                                                                4-<
                                                                                                ctf             ‘E
/A z                                                                                            C                CC
                                                                                                c
             "3lUJVd30V/                                                                                        -r^
                                                                                                                 <Li
           M3193IN<]-9n9                                                                vO     <u
                                                                                        _1     rH
                                                                                               >-(               fX
                                                                                                                 0
      -J                                                                                <      O
                   A3!IV9;
      o         703/V.J                                                                        A                 od
           9333! NO 93007                                                                                        <L

                  7039 JJ-V7                                                                   ,c
           901399 93d3\N<l                                                                      2
\0 °                                                                                            TO
                                                                                                                <4-
                                                                                                                 c
<_         1039 &3d3l9<J
                                                                                                <D
                                                                                                                 c/
                      3ia<3lW                                                                                    b
                                                                                               *-■               «
             703N STCXIIW                                                                                        4-
A 1                                                                                             rj               C
   H       tilldVHdOdOlHd                                                                      •a                <1
A.                                                                                              C/3             j-
                                                                                                                (3.
M-< -        709N 370am                                                                                #
                                                                                               zs               c
                    NV3Wl!P                                                                     a               1
                                                                                                      Pi
                                                                                               TS          ✓—'nP-
A                  ATUV3                                                                       ’>
                                                                                                      00
           OOldW 9333INO                                                                       ’S     CO    D    £
 z                                                                                                         T3
                                                                                                c
 <          7039 A19V3                                                                                p
      ui                                                                                                T> 4
<                V3? AOZV                                                                      4h
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                    03
                                                                                                    <U   C/5 C.
             103N ADIV3                                                                         c/3 cu C-> j;
                                                                                                         4—J .J
                   NV3WI^I3                                                                     1)  0
                                                                                                bfl (-1  C/5 0
                                                                                                cS  a
£L VI
   o       ,NVIflON30Wl                                                                         *->
                                                                                                a w
kj w               NV3WIS3                                                                      <u      «s^
      X.                                                                                        O
                                                                                                u
            05                                                                                  <u      .50 c
                                                                                               Ph 06
                               o''-                                                                     tlv ?
                                                                                                              cj
                    O - ^ <3>                                                                            ^ eJ
                                                                                               .4d       oj 5
            ^          S 2.                                                                             5^,4
                                                                                               ti.
C FMM£A AN» PN.I6K* &A6IN              &U&-[>NKST<K &A6IN
ME40L.   NEOLITHIC.         E NEOC..   NEOLITHI   C   ENEOLITHIC
                          Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.               387

the local geometric microlithic blade industry, a large number of cattle bones
have been excavated and claimed by Pidoplicko as belonging to domesticated
animals9. Ovicaprid bones, likewise claimed as domesticated, are also present
in relatively large numbers. Danilenko has suggested that the aceramic layers
at Kamennaya Mogila are at least as early as the Crimean Tardenoisian sites
and that their evidence indicates a centre for the initial development of cattle
breeding in the lower Don basin, immediately west of the Sea of Azov,
although no sites of this kind, apart from Kamennaya Mogila, have yet been
discovered10. He moreover suggests that it was the westwards spread of cattle
breeding from this region which caused the increase in cattle breeding in the
later neolithic cultures of south-east Europe and its introduction to central
temperate Europe in the Linear Pottery cultures. Most other Soviet archaeo¬
logists, however, deny this possibility and prefer one of two alternatives:
either the so-called domesticated cattle bones do not belong to the aceramic
layers but to later levels, since originally the different levels were not distin¬
guished by Pidoplicko in his analysis; or the aceramic levels are not as early
as they have been claimed, but are contemporary with the Dnieper-Donetz
culture, where domesticated cattle often occur11.
  The earliest more conclusive evidence for cattie domestication in Moldavia
and the Ukraine is that associated with the early phase of the Bug-Dniester
culture, as seen in the animal bone material from Mitkov island on the
Dniester12. This culture bordered directly on the distributional area of the
Cri§ culture which spread to Rumanian Moldavia from the Danube basin
in the early fifth millennium. The animal bone material from the Cri§ site of
Glavane§ti Vechi shows a predominance of domestic cattle, with rather less
domesticated ovicaprids and very few pigs13.
  Sites of the Cri§ culture have not yet been discovered east of the Prut river,
but a certain amount of contact with the Cri§ settlements is observable in the
early phase of the Bug-Dniester culture14. No other domesticated animals


Fig 4 Percentages of individuals among the domesticated animals of the early
     prehistoric sites of S.W. European U.S.S.R.
     The sites included are: 1. Crimean Tardenoisian: Murzak Koba, Zamil Koba II,
     Tas Ayir I; 2. Crimean early neolithic: Zamil Koba II, Tas Ayir I; 3. Azov Sea early
     neol.: Kruglik, Kamennaya Mogila I—III j 4. Dnieper Rapids early neol.: Surski is. I,
     Igreni VIII, Sulayevo; 5. Crimean middle neol.: Zamil Koba II, Tas Ayir I; 6. Dnieper
     Rapids middle neol.: Sobacki is. II, Igreni V; 7. Middle Dnieper middle neol.:
     Buzki; 8. Dnieper Rapids late neol.: Strelca Skelya; 9. Lower Dnieper eneolithic
     (early pit grave culture): Mikhailovka I (lower layer); 10. Bug-Dniester culture,
     aceramic phase: Soroki 1:2, Soroki 2:2 and 3; n. Bug-Dniester culture, early phase:
     Soroki 1:1b, Soroki 2:1, Soroki 3, Mitkov is.; 12. Bug-Dniester culture, middle and
     late phases: Soroki 1:1a, Basikov is., Soroki 5, Tsikinovka I; 13. Linear Pottery
     culture: Novia Ruse§ti I, Flore§ti (lower layer), (Tsira); 14. Pre-Cucuteni II: Flore§ti
     (upper layer); 15. Tripolye A (early Tripolye): Luka Vrublevetskaya, Bernovo Luka;
     16. Middle Tripolye (Dniester): Polivanov Yar; 17. Middle Tripolye (southern Bug):
     Sabatinovka I; 18. Middle Tripolye (Dnieper): Kolemiiscina II, Khalepye; 19. Late
     Tripolye (middle Dnieper): Podgorcie; 20. Late Tripolye (lower Dniester): Usatovo;
     2i. Gulmeni;a culture: Bolgrad, Ozernoye, Vulcane§ti.
     Sus scrofa L. is included in the percentages of domesticated animals of the Crimean
     sites and is shown by lighter shading in the appropriate column.
388   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     tringham


apait from cattle and dogs have yet been found in the settlements of this
phase. Nor have they been found in the sites of the middle phase of the
Bug-Dniester culture as seen in the animal bone material from Basikov
island on the Dniester river15.
   The middle phase of the Bug-Dniester culture has been shown to be
contemporary with the Linear Pottery culture of the Ukraine and Moldavia
whose settlements are distributed in the forest/steppe of the upper Dniester
basin, generally rather north and west of those of the Bug-Dniester culture16.
The material of the Dniester basin Linear Pottery settlements is very closely
related to that of the central European Linear Pottery sites, as seen at Bylany17,
especially to the late phase of this culture which has been dated by the carbon-
14 method to 4100-3900 b.c. The bone analyses from the lower layers at
Floresti18 and Novi Ruse§ti19 in Soviet Moldavia, and Traian (Dealul Fin-
tinilor) in Rumanian Moldavia20, show a definite increase in the proportion of
wild animals as compared with that of the central European Linear Pottery
settlements, although this proportion is nevertheless considerably smaller
than that of the wild animals in the Bug-Dniester settlements (Fig. 3). Among
the domestic animal bones, cattle predominate (at Floresti, 93% of these
belong to the long-horned variety), pig are of rather less importance, whereas
ovicaprids are almost negligible (Fig. 4).
  The later neolithic cultures which spread to Moldavia and the western part
of the Ukraine from the Balkans, which were partly evolved from the Linear
Pottery cultures but which also had very strong elements from the Danube
basin, and which are referred to as the Pre-Cucuteni/Cucuteni-Tripolye
complex, show a similar predominance of domesticated animals over wild
ones (Fig. 3); the proportion of domesticated animals increases in the later
phases, especially in the Dniester basin21. A similar increase may be observed
in the extension of the more southern copper-using Gumelni^a culture, as at
Bolgrad, Vulcane§ti and Ozemoye in the lower Dniester basin22. Domesticated
cattle, ovicaprids, and pigs are present on all the sites of the Cucuteni/
Tripolye and Gumelnipa cultures, generally with cattle predominating
although in the later Tripolye sites and Gumelni^a sites of the lower Dniester
basin there is a marked increase in the importance of sheep (Fig. 4).
  Further east in the middle and lower Dnieper basin, the sites of the
Dnieper/Donetz culture, which in its middle phase is contemporary with the
middle phase of the Tripolye culture, do not show such a high proportion of
domesticated animals until the latest neolithic, as at Strelca Skelya23 and
especially the beginning of the pit-grave culture in the lower Dnieper steppes,
as at Mikhailovka I29. On these latter sites a large increase and predominance
of ovicaprids may be observed among the domesticated animals, similar to the
eneolithic sites of the lower Dniester steppe at Usatovo and Sandraki25.
   Domesticated horses are attested among the animal bone material of the
eneolithic sites of the lower Dnieper and Dniester steppes, and would seem
                                                                           -0                                            dr              «y
                            NT        V-D                                  Os               '-O                          0 6^                                r sf    dr        VO
                                                         x:                                                                               uj                         0                                                         cy        Go
                                                               2
                                                                           <3    (NT         —-                         fsy> y           -—     tsrs
                                                                                                                                                            -yp                rd vr                                                     bo
                     Q                                                                                                                                               ro        py py
                     >                                   Vj                                                                                                                    -X Lo
                     UJ               -                                              <~N     -                          O'    CO ry             cy          -        cV                                      dr CO                       M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •yj   rd        hh
                     >-               'O             <3-       ■^c        -J GC ry                                      cr cr V s                           <-y                 UJ      Co
                                      CD             cy        0          ~-o O 0                                                               cv                                                                              bo
                     -J                                                                                                 0 cy <0                             O                  27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         So
                  V)                                  O                                                                 0c    00 0                                             O                                                         O
                              r+         df           Oo       <T         e VC               —                                              LJ CO           - rv               Of
                                                                                                                                                                                      ho                     -j    rv    cy    cr
         z                    V          p<~ CO                cT3        GO                GO,           m             GO                      w
                  1=5         Cl      Go Go CK>                06         bo                bo            Od            Oo                      bo
         \n                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8         s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fig 5 Analyses of animal bones from late mesolithic and early neolithic sites of the Crimea and Lower Dnieper Basin.
         <T          *
                              c<~>                                                                                                              -                                                                              ^x>       k5
         CO          -J                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                     vb     g£  bo bo cy                      v^)         -D                vq            a~
                                                                                                          cv            vO                      Vo                                                                             dT       k)
                     £>
         cL          O'     ^-0 dT kf CO                                                                                                       U)                                                                              rk-      ry
                            oc ro cn
                     £      TO        cy                       -       -                    -             Oo            -                       dt                                                                       CV    V)       kO
         £                                                                                                                                                                                                               vO    -x-
                                                                       ~r vO y)                          f~y                  ~ u>             yp                   v-O
        Uj                                                                                                                                                                           y?                                                  0
                                                                          Vi Vy                          w                      kr>            VO                   v-O                                                             \    0
           7                                                                                                                                                                         ho
                  l>
        £                                                                        —          —            dr                  CN    —           ro                   CO               _                      dT                      1    Go

                  z                                                   ey                   GO                                <X,
                                                                                 r+7                     GO
        cC        UJ                                                                                                         o-    S2          DO                   nr               vO                                                  O
                                                                      rv~        o<                      kn                                                                                                                         1    O
        Ld        U                                                                                                                                                 cy
                  O                                                                                      \n
        D                                                             Co
                                                                                CO         ey            ^0                  cy cy             cr                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                     CO                     0            cy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cy

        O                  -T                 o- O-                   Un
                                              vxr CTT                                      cr;                               o- cr              ru                        cr          zr
                 H         <37                                        ^0                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                               rp                                                       ^-0'
        -I                                    O O                                          CO                                rd 0              cr                         O    cy                                              mi       cr-
                 vS                                                                                                                                                                                                     r>r\
    :    &                                                            c^_                                                                      O                                                                                        C3~
                           cy                  -    -                                      J-            ~                   OO    -                                      —    Of                           cr    -      O     dT
         Z                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cr-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The four columns of each site (from left to right) represent: (i) total number of bones of the species; (2) percentage
         <r                                                                                y>            y>                                                                    ry    Vo                                        bo        cy
                  y        00                  dr   -J                                                                           dr                                       Of   Go                                              Vy%
                                                                      >0                   cy
                                                                                                         Vn                   dr 0             dX                              cy    so
                           O                  O O                                                                                                                         <0                                                            §a
        <        o'
                  0                                                   <r                                 cr                                    0                               O kj-                                     m              GO
        U!                 dT                 cS    CN                                     kr>                                0
                                                                                                                                   o(                                     —    O-                           co    cy     CD    00
                 \n                                                   co                                 rk                  ry                ry                                                                        ho             S'-
        r


        O
                ui>) kn                                                                    yf-                                                                                                                                  dr
         UJ                          vd        GO                                                        of                                            -O                                                                               ■v-O
         X                                                                                 Vn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <v*
         h                                                    oy                           O             of                                                               0                                                    <3-      rd
                oW
                I          O                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘k>
         u_                                   Go              lr>                          -                                                           CO                 —                                              Cjo             dJ-
                                                                                                         LT
         O
           <    kf <y>                                         ~T CO                       ro                          rci r-O y>              v-O cn               ^£>              k»         c-p.                           (V
               ob krj                                                                                                  r^~» y~>                N> »^n                                ^0         cO
           >-                                                                              CO                                                                                                                                            GO‘
        Vi     kr>                                                    0                                                •O CD 0                 0 O                  O'               <Z)        0                                        OY
           <c
        Lu
           z                                                          -                    0                                       cy                                                                                                    oO
        t 7, , § J-                                                                                                    —                       0/      —            cy               of         ~           - cy                         rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s
        \0     dr bo                                                                       krs                                     cy
               c*V                                                    Of                                                                       of                   0-               dT         rJ                             kh       -O
           I 1 f> ~k>                                                                                                                                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of the total; (3) number of individuals represented by the total; (4) percentage of individuals. Grand totals
                                                    2         3                                                        9     O     O           0       O            0'               O          <P
                   -0
        O <CM Vo                                              O
                                                                      0                    cr                                                                                                                                            Gfj
           *       ro                               m                                                                        - co              0 -                  n-               In         m           -     *o     5:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ry
               CT                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2T
        X                                      tV                     cV
                                                                                ^X)        yr                  cr-.                            cn                                    -n:                                       <r        k>
                                                                                sso                            rr-                                                                   py                                        ty
                                              '-~C gD                                                          cy                              cr-
        h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <-y
                P -                           of    —                H -0 dT                                   cr                              cO                                    j-                                 GO     dX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s
        j
                           ry        dj-                                        -0 cv                          <>                                                                                                              v£>       kT
        O                                     — -                    Lr>                                                                       —                                     CD                                                  od
                                     0                                                                         In                                                                                                              ry
        LU      T “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bo               ko
                <T MJ                               cO                r+~ 0                 0
                          -          cy       rb                      ry 00                                                                    dT                                                                              £2*
        Z                                                                                  'O                                                                                        dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dT              rT
                                              GO                                                         ko    VO                              vn                                                                              rd       CO
                          CT                                          C5“       cr
                                                                                                         -i        X                           <r                                                                              04.      cV

        >-      *3 cy                                                                                                                                                                                                   ry              yp
                                              dT                     r< CV                 cr           —      —                               —                                                                               SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rd
        J
                                              co                     f+-                   Lo                  •OO                                                                                                             vO       kjr
                          CO                                                    rv-                     y>     ry                              —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CN       rd
        <                                                                                               0                                                                                                                               c 1—
                5 uiOf                        *3*                    cr cO                 y>                  bo                                                                                                              VD       cy
                                                                                                                                               —                                                                               kr
                K'y ry                        CN                     cy                    C>(          cv.-   y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      apply only to mammals. Sus scrofa L. refers to immature animals aged from 5 weeks to 1 year which cannot
                                                    to               rO V>                 ro 03                             Vo    bo Vo                                                               co                      In       n
                <                                                                                                                                                                              9;
                CO                                  CT               o~ <r                 -j -T                             <3-   -j cr                                                               kT                      hr       Si,
        a
         z      0                                                                                                                                                                                           rd Oo
                *                                                               rV         CO     —                          cy — o<                                                           dT -            rv       ry     ry       2T
        <r                                          cy               CO

                <                                                                                                                                                                              O cy                                     -0
                                                    r                           9 O               —                          dX cy dT                                                          00                              -T
                                                                     cs                                                                                                                                                                 cr
        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            cy 0  kT
                                                                     ry O O                                                                                                                    0                        cr
        r       r                                   -J-              cv       —                                              j-    cy dX                                                       co
                                                                                                                                                                                                       rV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            co ry       C7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~r       hr>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0-
        H                                                            G> Vn bn                                          Vr>                                                                                                              O
                                                                                                               *o                                                                                                               1       0
                                                                     r-y cy                                            ry
        j <r1=9
              «r
        0 CO cs                                                                                                                                                                                                         00      1        Oo
                                                                     — — cO                                    ri -
            9 «
        V"> i 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
        tu                                                            — Un                 Of                  O"                                                                                                               1        0
            J 0                                                                                                UD -
        z                                                                                                                                                                                                               rO
                                                                     00         -kX cr                         ho -                                                                                                     rk-     1       rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               kS“
                                              -X                        rx r-W                                  bQ           rk-        rd                                                                                     V>'
                                              Vci                    Gd n~ r*d                                  0            rd         pd pd                                                                                           s


        LAT E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      be determined as definitely wild or domesticated and which have been classed together with the wild animals.
                h5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CO     cy
                                              cy                                —          —                   dT            -          -      —                                                                                        zz
                                                                     ry
                >- 2                                                                                                                                                                                                           kr       lo
                                              dr                     rc                    (N                  O
                                                                                CO                             y             -          -      -                                                                               ry       n--
                                              cy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -O
                T *C                                                                                           0-                                                                                                              m        —
                d-d                           m                      in         V)         n-                                —          cy     cy                                                                              rO
                                              c~>                                                              fo
                                                                                           vr»                                                                                                                                 \n
                                            r
                                                    uo
                                                                     Vb         a:         O      -o
                                                                                                        '/J                  V)
                                                                                                                                        so     iQ                         0         vs         s£j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -J
                                                                                a_         Qi      v>                                                                                                                          <        y>
                                            0       V                D                     UJ     0
                                                                                                                             UJ         u      2       s < ^                                   p
                                            c,      V                X          <          u.                J                     V) -
                                                                     Cs.        V              X         z                       UJ vn                                                                                         ?        <
                           r>        vo             .4               <r                    «r 0          UJ <                    -U u
                          r>         —       u                Ow
                                                                                           u.     or     Vb u_
                                                                                                                                     >                                                                                  J      1        ?
                                                              V)     UJ
                                                                                           O <               0         ?     ? UJ 7d
                                            C                                              c£            I CC          D         r
                                            Otf     <                                                                  -1    \ft                                                                                        <
                                                              V) v>                        O O               O                      Vi
                                            vj                                  0                                                u>                                                                                     h      g        1
                          -          <
                                            V>      vn                          uj         v0 Vb         ftu n                                 5       ? !-V°             ^         "      x   U            vog
                                                                 >                            D                        a     k! UJ >(                                                                                   0
                                                                               U.
                          s          £              Z
                                                              cr Of            £>.         •n •n        Vrt    V       z     J J                                                                                               1        3
                          0          <              V                UJ                    ID                  3       <     X> U) UJ                                                                                   V-
                                     VJ                       UJ
                                                                               <C                        0
                                                                                                               V>                2: u-                                                                                         2        2
                                            VO      0                <u        U           V) D          0             VJ
i
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -^rr-
                                     r~v-          N            rv          3T
                rt-           rj-
           o                                       sT           u»>
                Cv~>                 vb

      J         "SO
                rx
                              O'     -3            o            O          Ob
                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                 n-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                CN
                CX                                                         sO                                                                                                                                   Zf>
                              ru Vr>               ^£}          o                                                                                                                                       P-*'
                                                                           r-W.                                                                                                                         Vo      5f-
                N             06 <r
      *5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 rr-    Oo      g;
                <—>           -cr DO               bn          fN          cN                                                                                                                           vr
      2.s       <T                Os/              rv-         vn          a-                                                                                                                    Vo

            vo                                                  fS         so m vn 3- vn 3~ SO                               3~ bo                            DO    <r                                  Oo      rx
     H_                                         o CT                                                                                                                           rb
            tvs’        Vo                                     3T     ct   Cn                                                   O
     - «                             ri      rv Vn uS                           rt vn c< CD -3                               O                                      o                                   V^      c?
     1- UJ                                                                                                                                                                                              rn
     w ?s              sO     <o            r»~ <S       3 O               bO                                                                                                                    3*
                                    vo                                Vn                o      QQ sO         -    ZT         —    (N                          cn               -3                       ro
     UJ < ts           m                                                                                                                                                                         rX             §
     \r> -J
            cN          r*- Vn sO                                           r-o rn                                           CO   fN                          CO               Vn                               cr
                                            Vrv C3T n<         Cjo cr                    vr V3"                 r?                                                  '<5                                 (N
     3s Oo  CSO        -~©     O            sj- Vn m           CSC CD      Vb o          o ri> ;             CD ON           d    d                           d     d          d                        sJD
     - 1                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                         sa
                        DO U-,               CiD DS- <3                    <-n                                                                                                                                  cr
                           cv                                  V3“    n-          o      CD- Vn      H            sO                                          o                72
                |                                s^O                                                                         cr sO                                  <N                           oo
     2 sx                                            Or-       (1—                       rN                                                                                                      rx     5       e*
                                                                           rN
                                                     N          CP                                   —o                           fN              sj>    rX
                CN                           VC>                                  cN     CN
                                                 cr Oo                                                                                                  Vn
                                                                                         Vn          <~s<                         vn              cs                                                    NO     ^
                                             CN                s?
                                                                                                                                                                                                 •VO            so
                                                   un    n-    00                                    —                            rN              —     CN                                       m       CN     m
     ~ -2       <~N                                                               CS    CN
     >
     O U)                                        CN                                                                                                     rx
                cr                          (N      C57                           O      Vn                                       so              3T
                                                cb             «~N                                                                                                                                              Vr>
                -3-                         <Z> SUD SO         DN                        O           o                            <d                    d                                               bn      cr~
                                                                                                                                                  d
     Cn ^
                r>                                 <r          o                                                                                                                                 Vn
     <r                                                        Co                                    —                                                                                                          Xs.
     CD v. c^T                              CN     UO v£                          OO     3“                                       vn              DO    CN                                       Oo     3       rt-


         o,

     vi <J
     ' * vaj

                zr                   -~r           DO <-N bo so                   N                                                          cx                                                                 cr
                                                                                  QO     m                                        <N
                                                          b
                                                      Vr> cst
     i; ~ZT                         o                         c£>                        O     o                                  <~N        d                                                          bn


cn   Ii         ZT
               r~                   sjr
                                                   <r CN
                                                      :dr      Dsj su             5j- cn        _
                                                                                                                                  CX
                                                                                                                                             (N
                                                                                                                                                                                                rX
                                                                                                                                                                                                DVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                O-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        bn


                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                rvs
                Vn                  cS      <r                 bo          s£>                                                    d                                       sO
     H?            Oo                                                                                                                                                                                           rtf.
                sf SO vO            DO      SUD                s3-                                                                cn
     <2
     *£                                                                                                                                                                                         «N
     > o  cr                 •J* (N                            CA          —                                                      CN                                      —                     —o              TZ
               D-n                          -3-                                                                                                                                                         bn
     3^ —o ex                                                                                                                                                                                            <Do    rx
     ~ UJ                           o-      CT                 CN          cn                                                     m                                       DO
          <5>0 V-o
               -D                   o       DO                 sj          o                                                      o                                       d


     Id         r+-
                px
                 (U—
                       O
                       ~-o o
                       rv- ru       Vo
                                 V/-*                    <-v
                                                               s           •3“
                                                                           sO           S-D
                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                  s£>                   fN
                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                sD
                                                                                                                                                                                                s-X>
                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                         S      ~3~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                sO

                             Kr* r*7                     Vr>   rv.                                                                                Vo
                X* ex                       •s-Q rb-                                                                                                    Vo                                              o       O
               3DA           oS “sD                                                                                                               m                                                     sO      <3
               o                             O     bo                                                                                                                                           s-O             Oo
      -J               rN N-O       —                     3- m             cN            CN                       cn                                                                     cr     so      So
               so                                  v~i                                                                            (N              vo 3“                                                 cr      SO
      UJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                        sO
      V)

      £
      \ft       *Q
                       SO
                       o
                          DO        Vo
                                    C^»
                                             Vr>
                                             OO
                                                   b
                                                               cn          bn            cN                       vn              rN              OO    bn                                r>-
                                                                                                                                                                                                cr~
                                                                                                                                                                                                dT      t~x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■T
                sO     ey¬   cr rr-                UO    3     3T                                                                 rN
                                                                                  cr           <3?                rt~                                                                                    O
                SP     es    o< Vo                 Cjo                                         CN                 Vn              N                                                                             §
                                                                                  K                                                                                                                      cy

                fO     —     -      cS             CO    3T    3T                 —            —                                                                                          —             Ps      bo
                                                                                                                  CN              vn                    Oo
      V
               rN cE. CO            rv-                        'n                 3                                                                     s-D
                                                   0- Vn                          m                                               Vn                                                                            Vn
      rvi      -3                                                                                                 rv                                                                                    bn
                                    CN             vn          cr                 o            vn
      3                                                                                                                                                 N                                               s:      £
      CO       rN
               ZP
                  CO         -T     cjo            sO    bo
                                                         n<
                                                               rV-
                                                               3^
                                                                                  —            _                  bn
                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                  ro
                                                                                                                                                        sO
                                                                                                                                                        rx                          UD    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                $
                <N           CT     CT       VO    a:          cO
                                                               -US                             cn           cn
                                                                           sj>                 S-D          So    N                     rX        rX    <N
                <o                  04s      O
                       <N    rV                    r^~         rS                                           rX                          Vn        •o'   Vn'
                                                                           t~N                 •-H                Vn

     >o  Vo OO rO CO                        -3- c-n            —           _                   _            _     cN                    rN        cN    cN                          CN   —              o:      cr
     < '^O Vo -Q                            r-O
                                                               fO          cr                               cr                                          cr
     CQ  rX rH    Uj-                                                                          DC                                       cn        n
                                            <~u    rv-                     O                                o                                           cS
     o                                                                                                                                                                                                  N       N
        '~JO ZT O                            CO    sO
     NO  Vo Vo    <3-                                          CO          rN                                                                                                                    Vn
                                            'sT                                                             —     cr                                                                                    vy      vO
                                                                                                                                        vn        r\-   r<                          (N    *n            CN      bv»
                                            so           sUJ   si)         cO
         O                   so                                                                      DO     cn -sip                                                                                     o       o
                                            s^>    Cr    SO    D-a         cO                        cb     rb SO                                                                                       CN      OO
     Ht
                             Vo             r(     r^i   CN    CN                                                                                                                               O               <r
     a! o                                                                  -                         —      -     cN                                                                                    VO
     _ UJ                                                                                                                                                                                       ro              <NI
     >-z
     <2
     H/> r
                Vn
                       6     S
                             r-O
                                            CO
                                            O
                                                   to    sO
                                                               rv-
                                                               -3*

                                                               D3~
                                                                           sO
                                                                                                     d      O
                                                                                                                  CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                        r>-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                cr

                                                                                                                                                                                                                P*
     <C ^       r+-                                do rv~                  O
                    -        CT             CO                 'or                                                <n                                                                                    rN      <N
      HSi       co                                 SO <r                                             -      -                                                                       rb                          bn
                                                               DO          o •                                    r<                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                 0~                 or.                  sO CT                                 <3-           Vo
                                                   c+r                            <3~                                                                   rv
               V£>                  Vo                   rv- Vo'
                                                                                  vn                        n' cr                                                                                       OO       rN
                                                                                               vn
      N                                                                                                     JZt Vri
                —                   -              CN m        -                  -            -                  -
                                                                                                            3-                                          ot                                      rfs             vr>
      2:                                                                                                                                                                                 Vn
                H-                                 r>- o~
      UJ                                                  -3-                     Vn           Zr           -0~
                                    cS             <>                                                                                                                                                           rx.
      ft£       rN                                 m      O                                                                                                                                             Jc
                                                                                  <r           O                  O
      Vb
               cr                                  v>n   bo
                                                                                                         O
               Cv •                 vr*
                                    —
                                                   rv-   n- —                     IZ           —         cH CN
                                                                                                                                                     rx
                                                                                                                                                     rx                             <N          N       <r      S?
                r*- tA rO                                      If                                    So V“>                             So        Vo VP                                                        -CN
                                    -3      Vn           H                                     to    ^T or C5“
               3^4.                                      n     b                                                                  bp                                                                    ■bj'
      N                                                                                 -CCi         •o' cS vb                                    d CD
      vS        Vo           CO             <N           bo —
                                                   b                       cn           Vo  3" - —                rn
                                                                                                                                                        -3                          sO                          vn
                       <-o                                                                                                                        le                                     <r      s      So
                         Vo                        sj                                       r-J                                                                                                 nnl     fb
                                                         V/>               CV-          Sr <n      rC*                                                                                                         —Dai_
      SO       cO                                                                                  rn
                       O O cH                      cn                                                             c9              vn              d     ST
      C£                                                 <3> o             o            <z>     <d d                              <s
                                                                                                                                                                                                        sO      -3
               rb                   cr      rv     DO

                                                                                                                                                                                         s?
                             lo                       bo                                                       o<
     Vo        <T                           DO     CO          —           rh                  (N    CN     cn fN                 Vo
                                                                                                                                                  rv-
                                                                                                                                                  Vn
                                                                                                                                                        vn
                                                                                                                                                        s3                          o
                                                                                                                                                                                                —       o
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -sn      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -i£L

                                                                           vr>
                             X V?                                                                           Vl    vn                                    V)         Z)
                                                                                                                        'i                        Vn
                                                                                                                                                                          <
                             8 £                   ft.    g 2 Vn        vn ct uj
                                                               VJ VD » vu \—
                                                                                 u:
                                                                                 Cft < UJ
                                                                                           o
                                                                                              < z cd       vj o
                                                         oa Js
                                                            ^ 30
                                                                  D o. 3 sn
                                                                              £  o 2 tft O 3 ot:
                                                                                                 < 3
                                                                                                    <      O cd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                             £ 3             - 2
                                                                  ft. 3
                                                                      3 UJ UJ Q VO 0       n b 3 D X ot <c                                                                                                      <
                             o r                  ^ s    ^  t-    3
                                                                      > X     CC
                                                                            3 3
                                                                                     u.       d
                                                                                           a 3 v!> 3 >• VJ h                                                                                                    X
                «r     s     °c     <c                                                                        <
                1“ < vj U.                  VD     V)
                                            Z> Z> a a V 5 vd   v>       vn vn UJ     vn O'
                                                                                           X < vn cd
                                                                                                    tft 3 VD H                                                                                                  2
                                                      vS s *• o 2
                                                         uj    V  vn                 UJ                    P
                                            CD >                        UJ                 c               r-
                                                         CC                   sn X   J—       cd Cd O X
                     £ £                    O'                             X                               3 <
                                                  ft. ^ )0 n 3 T J UJ
                                            UJ U <r
                                                   &■
                                                      ^> O to              3 □.  bi dL \n
                                                                                 < <c < Ck_
                                                                                              b D
                                                                                           <r Z) 3 5?
                                                                                                        2 3 ci>                                                                     aj> v>b)                    £>
                                               O O Vo             VJ > Z UJ UJ
                                                                           Lu 3 X X     VJ    3 vn
                                                                                                        >- tz
                                                                                                                                                                                    <£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                J
                                                                                                    S J o vn
                         Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.          391

to be earlier further east in the Dnieper basin if the evidence for domesticated
horses from Dereivka26 is valid; this site on the middle Dnieper, belonging to
the middle phase of the Dnieper-Donetz culture, is contemporary with Tri-
polye Bi on the Dniester where, so far, no domesticated horse bones have
been excavated from this period. In Figs. 3-6, horses have been included
with wild animals although, as has been mentioned above, those from Mik-
hailovka and the late Tripolye sites may be identified as domesticated animals.




      Notes
       1 Krainov, D. A. (i960). Pescernaya Stoyank Tas Ayir, kak osnova peri-
         odizatsii poslepaleoliticeskikh kultur Krima, Materiali i Issledovaniya po
         Arkheologii, 91. Moscow.
       2 Krainov, D. A. (i960), op. cit. pp. 131-3.
       3 Dimitrieva, E. L. (i960). Fauna Krimskikh stoyanok Zamil Koba II i Tas
         Ayir I, Mat. Issled Arch., 91, pp. 166-87.
       4 Dimitrieva, E. L. (i960), op. cit. p. 173.
       5 Stoljar, A. D. (1959). Ob odnom ceentre odomasnivaniya svini, Sov. Arkh.,
         3-4, PP- 3-i8.
       6 Telegin, D. J. (1961). K voprosu o Dnepro-Donetskoi neoliticeskei-
         kulture, Sov. Arkh., 4, p. 26; Telegin, D. J. (1967). Istoriya piemen
         Dnepre-Donetkulture (5th-3rd mill.), Avtoreferat dissertat. na soisk.
         ucen. Doctora 1st. Nauk. Kiev.
       7 Markeyevic, V. I. (1965). Issledovania neolita na Srednem Dnestre,
         Kratkiye Soobisceniya Inst. Arkh., 105, pp. 85-90. Moscow; Markeyevic,
         V. I. (1968). Neolit Moldavii, Avtoreferat dissertat. na Kand. 1st. Nanka,
         Moscow.
       8 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). Iz istorii goletsenovoi fauni pozvonocnikh v
         Vostecnoi Evrope, Prirodnaya obstanovka i fauni proslovo I, 132, Kiev,
         pp. 119-47-
       9 Pidoplicko, I. G. (1956). Matenale do Vivceniya minulikh faun URSR.
         Kiev. pp. 54-5; Danilenko, V. M. (1952). Priazovskaya ekspeditsiya
         1947 g-j Arkh. Pam. URSR, 4, Kiev, pp. 67-9.
      10 Danilenko, V. M. In discussion at Institute of Archaeology, Kiev, June
         1967.
      11 Telegin, D. J. (1967). ibid.
      12 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). op. cit. p. 132.
      13 Comsa, E. (1959). La civilisation Cris sur le territoire de la R. P. Roumanie,
         Acta Arch. Carpathica, 1 (2), Kracow, pp. 173-84.
      14 Passek, R. S. (1962). Relations entre l’Europe Occidental et l’Europe
         Orientale a l’epoque neolithique, Atti del Congresse ISPP, Rome, pp.
          126-44.
      15 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). op. cit. p. 132.
      16 Passek, T. S. (1962). ibid.; Passek, T. S. and Cernys, E. K. (1963).
         Pamyatniki kulturi linieno-lentocnoi keramiki na territorii SSSR,
         Arkheologiya SSSR, B 1-2, Moscow.
      17 Soudsky, B. (1966)^ Bylany. Prague.
      18 Passek, T. S. and Cernys, E. K. (1963). op. cit. pp. 31-2.
      19 David, A. I. and Markeyevic, V. I. (1967). Fauna mlekopitayuscikh
         poselenia Noviye Rusesti I, Izvestia Akademii Nauk Mold. SSSR, 4,
          Kisinev, pp. 3-26.
      20 Necrasov, C. and Haimovici, S. (1962). Studiul restorilor de fauna
14—DOPAA   *   «
392   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    tringham


         descoperite in 1959 la Traian (D. Vieii §i D. Fintinilor), Materiale, 8,
         Bucure§ti, p. 262.
      21 Passek, T. S. (1962). ibid.
      22 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). ibid.
      23 Pidoplicko, I. G. (1956). op. cit. p. 14.
      24 Passek, T. S. (1962). ibid.
      25 Pidoplicko, I. G. (1956). op. cit. pp. 33-5.
      26 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). op. cit. pp. 14, 132.
      WILLIAM WATSON

      Early animal domestication in China


The bones of domestic animals (or of the animals susceptible of domestica¬
tion) have been excavated on many neolithic sites, but not yet in sufficient
quantities to allow inference as to regional differences or indicate conclusively
a pattern of development in the various neolithic traditions. A detailed
analysis of the animal remains is available for only one place, the Yang Shao
culture site of Pan-p’o in south Shensi, other reports merely naming species
by common terms and giving no statistical information.
  By far the commonest of domestic animals are dogs and pigs, which are
found at Yang Shao, Proto-Lung Shan and Lung Shan sites. Cattle and sheep/
goats have also been identified at sites of each of these types, but are so rare
as to leave the question of complete domestication in doubt1. There is no
reliable report of horse associated with the Yang Shao, but a site in the Fen Ho
valley of south Shensi, with pottery of Lung Shan type, contained bones of
horse2. This site adjoins the upland area where the beginnings of horse¬
raising would naturally be looked for. In Manchuria horse has been identified
in association with pottery of derived Yang Shao type, but of presumed later
date than the Yang Shao culture of the Yellow River valley3. There are
general indications from excavation that the proportions of sheep/goats and
cattle is greater at sites of Lung Shan culture, where the scapulae of both are
frequently found used in a method of divination. This would indicate the
expected trend, the local domestication of these animals falling later than that
of the dog and pig and contributing to the broad differentiation of the Yang
Shao and the Lung Shan traditions.
  The Kansu branch of the Yang Shao culture is now shown to be retarded
by comparison with the development along the Wei River valley and the
middle course of the Yellow River, and certainly continues in local variant
forms as late as the beginning of the Bronze Age in the first half of the second
millennium b.c. The appearance of a majority of sheep/goat bones at sites in
Kansu therefore does not necessarily indicate priority over their appearance
in Lung Shan context farther east, although the nature of the uplands of
Kansu and adjacent regions to west and south-west being well suited to sheep
raising (particularly in the conditions of greater warmth and rainfall indicated
394   Part 111 Regional and local evidence for domestication    WATSON


for the high neolithic period in north China), would incline one to look there
for the earliest domestication4. At Huang-niang-t’ai in Kansu cattle bones
were found as well as those of pig and sheep, but so far this association has
been exceptional for the western branch of the Yang Shao culture5.
  At Pan-p’o in south Shensi, a large village site fully excavated and fully
representative of the developed Yang Shao culture, all the domesticable
species were present6. The domesticated pig was ubiquitous, its bones being
found in nearly every one of the 200+ numbered features of the site. Nearly
all the animals had been killed young, very few bones belonging to individuals
estimated at more than one year of age. The skeletal characteristics fall within
the range of wild Sus scrofa, but they do not come close to wild species
surviving in China, so that there is no presumption in favour of local domestica¬
tion. The dogs (six individuals identified) are small boned with raised fore¬
head, so markedly different from Canis lupus that there can hardly be question
of recent local domestication. Only three sheep were identified, with dental
features suggesting close alliance to the Ovis shangi found at the Bronze Age
capital of Anyang (c. 1650-1027 b.c.) and known as the Yin sheep. Inde¬
terminate bovid and horse were represented by only one tooth apiece. The
very small proportion of the last three specimens in the total of bones found
at the site supports no more than the inference of a beginning of domestica¬
tion, if that, and they can have played only a small part in the Yang Shao
economy. The horse tooth resembles closely that of Przewalski’s horse, to
which are also related all the horses known in the pre-Han period and before
the introduction of superior breeds from the far west.
  Among the wild animals which were hunted by the Yan Shao farmers the
spotted deer (Pseudaxis hortularum) was second only to the pig in frequency;
it is identical with the deer still found wild in north, south and east China.
The roebuck (hornless river deer, Hydropotes inermis), also sufficiently
frequent to imply regular hunting for food, is identical with the surviving
animal, which is now fotmd only in the well-watered terrain on the lower
Yangtze. Its presence at Pan-p’o implies a nearby terrain of pond and marsh,
such as exists no longer, with surrounds of high grass, and a somewhat
warmer climate than that at present experienced in the Yellow River valley.
The bamboo rat (Rhizomys sinensis) is no longer to be found in the vicinity
of Pan-p’o, and its ancient presence is a further indication of warmer weather,
greater abundance of surface water and thickets of bamboo.
  At Pan-p’o was found also evidence of a fowl (Gallus sp.) which may hint
at a beginning of domestic poultry, but that inference needs confirmation.
At a Lung Shan site in Hupei some pottery models of ducks and geese,
accompanying others of sheep, dogs, turtles and fish, put domesticated fowl
almost, but not quite, beyond question. It is perhaps to be expected that this
step in animal husbandry should accompany the adoption or at least notable
expansion in cattle and sheep raising which has been attributed to the Lung
Shan culture and period.
                               Early animal domestication in China      395



Notes
1 Andersson, J. G. (1943). Prehistory of the Chinese, Bull. Mus. Far Eastern
  Antiquities, 15, p. 43; Bylin-Althin, M. (1946). Ch’i Chia P’ing and Lo
  Hant’ang, Bull. Mus. Far Eastern Antiquities, 18, p. 458; T’ung Chu-ch’en
  (1957). The distribution and chronology of neolithic culture in the lower
  courses of the Yangtze and Yellow River, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 2, pp. 7-21.
2 At the site of Kuang-she; see Shou Tien (1957). Discovery of the neolithic
  site at Kuang-she, Wen wu ts’an k’ao tzu liao, 1, pp. 57-9.
3 Hamada Kosaku and Mizuno Seiichi (1938). Ch’ih-feng, Hung-shan-hou.
  Tokyo; LiiTsun-e (1958). Report of an archaeological reconnaissance at
  Hung-shan (Chih-feng), Inner Mongolia, K’ao ku hsiieh. pao, 3, pp. 25-40.
4 Kuo Te-yung (1958). An archaeological reconnaissance in Wei-yiian hsien,
  Lung-hsia-hsien and Wu-shan hsien on the upper Wei river in Kansu
  province, K’ao ku t’ung hsiin, 7, pp. 6-160; Kuo Te-yung (i960). Report
  on excavations of the site of Huang-mang-mang-t’ai, in Wu-wei-hsien,
  Kansu province, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 2, pp. 59-60; Cheng Nai-wu and
  Hsieh Tuan-chu (i960). A brief report of excavations at two sites of the
  Chi-Chia culture at Ho-chuang and Chin-wei in Lin-hsia, K’ao ku, 3,
  pp. 9-12.
5 Chang Yun-p’eng (1956). A short report of archaeological excavations at
  Ching-shan and T’ien-men in Hupei, K’ao ku t’ung hsiin, 3, pp. 11-21.
6 Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of China (1963).
  Hsi-an Pan-p’o. Peking, pp. 255-69.
     .




■■       ■
      WILLIAM WATSON

      Early cereal cultivation in China


As there is no absolute or even developed relative chronology for the neo¬
lithic period in China it is only possible to make broad distinctions in the
early history of cereal cultivation. The exiguous evidence this far available
comes in all cases from excavated levels assigned to comparatively advanced
forms of neolithic culture. The initial phases of neolithic culture in its local
varieties are still poorly defined and there is no argument for associating the
introduction of agriculture closely with the adoption of other characteristic
neolithic practices; nor, among the reported specimens, have any primitive
strains been identified such as to imply an initial stage in local domestication.
The example of Japan, where the pottery-using Jomon culture subsisted for
some six millennia (on radiocarbon evidence) before the arrival of rice as the
first cereal in the second century B.C., suggests that a comparable dislocation
of neolithic techniques may have occurred in China. Apart from the survival
of grain and seeds in archaeological contexts, the wide distribution in China of
characteristic flat stone knives, pierced or notched for hafting and often
abraded, is taken as evidence of grain harvesting, and where they occur in a
full neolithic context, or on sites where grain has been recovered, the inference
appears sound. These knives are distributed mainly along the middle course
of the Yellow River, to the north-east as far as Liaotung, through the eastern
coastal provinces as far south as northern Fukien, and along the Yangtze
valley into Szechwan. The differences in distribution of the main varieties
of the knife, oblong and crescentic, do not coincide with the limits of the main
divisions of neolithic culture as defined in ceramic terms, and so cannot be
related closely to the differences of cultivated grains that are noted below1.
   The terms of the problem are set by the climatic and pedological distinction
between north and south. The primary loess reaches from the north-west
to a limit just south of the Yellow River and as far east as Honan, and beyond
to the coast the soil is formed of the fluviatile extension of the loess. Loessic
soil is on the whole alkaline, poor for holding water, but when water is
supplied to it it brings active constituents towards the surface by capillary
action, and is thus to some extent self-fertilizing. This property must have
encouraged the large size and settled character of neolithic sites in the Yellow
398   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   WATSON


River valley. The extent of the primary loess coincides closely with the dis¬
tribution of the Yang Shao neolithic tradition. East of Honan and down the
coast from Liaotung to Chekiang is the preserve of the Lung Shan culture,
which in part occupies the redeposited loess but in part also is found on the
terrain characteristic of the lower lying regions extending from the Yangtze
basin southwards. This region is well-watered, with much permanent water,
and has soils of acid type. Towards the south it enjoys increasingly heavy
rainfall. Precipitation is less in the north and less seasonally confined, and
there is a long cold winter.
  The cereals identified in neolithic contexts are millet, rice and wheat. The
first two are preserved in the grain, placed in pots with burials, and rice
survives as husk included in baked clay2. Cultivation on the deep primary
loess requires a cereal able to stand long rainless periods, and the millet
which was the staple of the Yang Shao farmers meets this requirement
admirably. Foxtail millet (Setaria italica var. germanica) and broom corn millet
(Panicum miliaceum) have been identified at Yang Shao sites in Shensi and
southern Shansi3. The dominant position of the millet varieties along the
middle and upper courses of the Yellow River in the neolithic period is fully
established, and they remain an important crop today. The question of
the cultivation of rice in the Yang Shao region and on the primary loess
remains problematic. The difficulty of providing sufficient water on this
terrain might be thought prohibitive, but Oryza sativa was identified at the
eponymous site of Yang Shao Ts’un in Honan4 and it is reported from Liu
Tzu Chen in Shensi6. The context is however doubtful at the first site, and
at the latter, where Setaria italica was recognized with certainty, the identi¬
fication of rice was tentative (“husks resembling rice”). Only at this site has
there been the suggestion of the presence of both cereals. Thus the case for
the cultivation of rice in the context of the Yang Shao neolithic and on the
primary loess is not yet proven.
  Apart from these sites, neolithic rice is reported only from places in the
eastern part of the Yangtze basin (Anhui, Kiangsi, Chekiang, Hupei) in the
well-watered region of southern soil and climate, in each case in a context
of local Lung Shan type6. These sites are believed to be later than the main
Yang Shao Lung Shan development of the Yellow River zone, possibly
little before the beginning of the Shang Bronze Age (c. 1650 B.C.). The rice
husks recovered from baked clay at sites on the Chiang Han Plain, Hupei,
belonging to the same late neolithic period, resemble the Keng sub-species
(Oryza sativa ssp. spontanea Roschev), cultivated at the present day in east
China, differing sharply from the other modern variety, subsp. Hsien Ting,
cultivated in the same region. The neolithic rice is distinguished by the width
of the grain (length to width ratio 2-01) and the prominent fine hairs on the
husk surface and the ridges7.
  Wheat has only once been identified with certainty in neolithic context,
at Tiao Yu T ai in northern Anhui, accompanied by Lung Shan pottery8.
                                          Early cereal cultivation in China   399


In the Shang Bronze Age, to judge from the divinatory texts excavated at
Anyang, wheat was still of minor importance compared with millet. Where
these texts specify the grain, the ideographs used to do so are interpreted in
most cases as varieties of millet (yellow and black). The ideograph for wheat is
securely identified, but appears rarely. There seems to be no instance of the
ideograph interpretable as rice9.
  Regarding kaoliang (.Andropogon sorghum) the position is obscure and
tantalizing. In recent syntheses of Chinese archaeology we read that it was
cultivated both in neolithic times and in the Shang and Chou periods10. For
the neolithic K. C. Chang can only cite Bishop’s statement of 1928, in an
article dealing generally with the neolithic period in north China: “from one
site (Ching Ts’un) grains of Sorghum vulgare have been identified. If these
date in reality from neolithic times, as appears certain, this discovery is of
decided interest; for hitherto it has generally been believed that this valuable
food plant, the kaoliang or ‘grand millet’ of the modern Chinese, was intro¬
duced from India about the sixth century a.d.”11 Other authorities cited base
their conclusion on the interpretation of grain characters in Shang oracle
texts, a process beset with doubt12. Unfortunately the systematic excavations
undertaken on early sites since 1950 have yielded only one identification
of sorghum: the excavators of San Li Tun report that “some stalks of
kac-liang sorghum were also preserved”13, and even here we lack detailed
publication of criteria of determinations, cultural context and the manner of
association.
   In his recent paper Dogett does not entertain the possibility of an intro¬
duction of domesticated sorghum into China so early as the neolithic period.
He doubts also the suggestion made by Burkill in 1953 that it reached China
direct from its African home across the Sabaean lane and not before the
thirteenth century a.d.14 He prefers Ball’s opinion of 1913 that kaoliang,
having some affinities with Indian sorghums, developed from a variety which
reached China from India “some ten or fifteen centuries ago”. This theory
assumes a coastwise spread. In a subsequent verbal communication Dogett
has however allowed that sorghum may have arrived in China earlier,
particularly as it has been recovered in India earlier than the beginning of the
Christian era. The distinct characteristics of the Chinese kaoliangs may, he
believes, have been acquired through hybridization with the native wild
Sorghum propinquum. Sorghums are to be found all through Central Asia.
Thus one must reckon with the possibility that they spread thence into China
at a time early enough to allow for the development of the kaoliangs as a
distinct race15. Meanwhile it is well to suspend judgement on the question
until better excavated evidence is available in China. Dogett accepts a date
for the arrival of sorghum in India between 1500 and 1000 b.c. Even in
Central China neolithic culture may extend in places below the first of these
dates, and Bishop’s report, if substantiated by other finds, would not clash
with the chronology inferred for India.
400   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    WATSON


  There appears to be no difficulty in accounting for the other sorghum race
found in China: the Amber Canes, Sorghum dochna. These are related to
Amber Canes found spread along the coasts from East Africa around India,
and south-east Asia to China, and their uniformity along the whole of this
route points to a rapid and recent spread16.
  It is not uncommon for seeds of other food plants and fruit trees to be
recovered in excavations. At the site of Ch’ien Shan Yang in Chekiang, in
addition to rice, the following were identified: Prunus persica, Cucumis
melo (gourd), Trapa natans (water chestnut), Arachis hypogea, Sesamum
indicum, Vida faba11. At the large village site of Pan-p’o in Shensi a pot was
found filled with seeds described as edible vegetable. The pollen recovered
at this site has been interpreted as indicating a wide grassy plain around the
village with a scatter of elm, persimmon, and other deciduous trees possibly
providing animal fodder but not human food. Seeds of hazel, pine and chest¬
nut, found at depth on the site, were probably brought from a distance, for
no pollen of the nut trees was found, and the far-carrying pine pollen, though
present, does not necessarily indicate that the trees were near18.
  In sum, the archaeological evidence for the character and distribution of
cereals in China in the neolithic period prefigures not unexpectedly the
modern distribution, with this main difference, that wheat, now become the
main crop in the loessic region from Kansu to Shantung and extending
beyond the loess north-east to Manchuria and at places reaching south
towards the Yangtze, was of minor importance in the neolithic period, when
the staple on the loessic soil was varieties of millet. Today only a compara¬
tively small area grows both wheat and rice, and in early time also it seems that
millet and rice were largely mutually exclusive, this arising no doubt then as
now from difference of terrain and soil rather than climate, and from the
local incompatibility of the field system of each. What is known of the
neolithic cereals reinforces the cultural division recognized on other grounds
between the Yang Shao and the Lung Shan traditions. All that has been said
above must be qualified by the following considerations, apart from the still
unsatisfactorily limited number of determinations on which the broader
inferences are based:

1 The lack of a reliable chronology for the neolithic period. This applies
  even to the relation of the Yang Shao and Lung Shan cultures: these have
  been seen hitherto as broadly contemporary in origins at least in west and
  east respectively, but are now arguable as broadly successive, the Lung
  Shan being the later facies of the Yang Shao, in fully developed form
  coming to occupy exclusively the fluviatile loess as it formed and became
  habitable on the lower Yellow River.
2 There is no archaeological evidence for early cereals in Manchuria,
  Szechwan (both specially favoured for agriculture) and the region of south¬
  east and south China where the ceramic tradition of the so-called “south-
                                           Early cereal cultivation in China     401


  eastern neolithic” persisted very late, and where agriculture also made a
  tardy appearance.
3 The study of the historical pedology and climatology of east Asia is still
  little advanced, and results are hardly available for archaeological inter¬
  pretation.
4 In China archaeologists are denied the evidence provided elsewhere by the
  survival of fossil field systems. As regards rice cultivation progress in this
  matter should prove possible, as the antiquity of existing field systems is
  realized and excavation is undertaken specifically to determine it. There
  has been a presumption in the past that the focus of domestication for
  rice, if it should prove definable, will lie in south-east Asia. The investiga¬
  tion of ancient fields in that area may throw fight on the problem. No
  theory has been expressed as to the geographical origin of domesticated
  millets.



     Notes
       1 An Chih-min (1955). The stone knives of ancient China, K’ao ku hsiieh pao,
          10, pp. 27-51.
      2 The possibility of identifying grain impressions in pottery has not yet
          been exploited. While it can hardly be doubted that evidence of this kind
         must exist, the careful levigation to which the clay is subjected in most of
         the advanced neolithic areas must tend to minimize it.
      3 Yellow River Catchment Archaeological Commission (1959). Brief report
         of archaeological excavations at Liu Tzu Chen, Hua Hsien, Shensi,
         K’ao ku, 2, pp. 71-5; also Anon. (1955). Discoveries at a neolithic village
         —Pan-p’o near Hsi-an, K’ao ku t’ung hsiin, 3, pp. 15-16; Bishop, C. W.
          (1933). The neolithic age in northern China, Antiquity, 28, pp. 389-404;
          Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of China (1963).
         Hsi-an Pan-p’o, Peking, p. 124, pi. LV-LVIII.
      4 Andersson, J. G. (1947). Prehistoric sites in Honan, Bull. Mus. Far
         Eastern Antiquities, 19, pp. 21-2.
      5 Yellow River Catchment Archaeological Commission (1959). ibid.
      6 Hu Yiieh ch’ien (1957). Reconnaissance of neolithic sites in Anhui,
         K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 1, pp. 21-30; Hsieh Ch’un-chu and Chu Chiang (1955).
         Examination of the neolithic site at Hsien li tun in Wu hsi, Kiangsu,
          Wen wu, 8, pp. 48-59; Chekiang Cultural Properties Control Commission
         (i960). Excavations of Ch’ien Shan Yang in Wu Hsing, K’ao ku hsiieh pao,
         2, pp. 73-91; Andersson, J. G. (1946). ibid.; Yellow River Catchment
         Archaeological Commission (1959). op. cit. PP- 7I_5-
      7 Ting Ying (1959). Examination of rice husk found in red baked earth of the
         neolithic period in the Chiang Han plain, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 4, pp. 31-4.
      8 Hu Yiieh-ch’ien (1957). ibid.
      9 Ch’en Meng chia (1956). Yin hsii pu tz’u shu, Peking, pp. 525-32.
     10 Cheng, T. K. (i960). Archaeology in China, II, Shang China, Cambridge,
         p. 197; Cheng, T. K. (1963). Archaeology in China, III, Chou China,
         Cambridge, p. 22; Chang, K. C. (1963). The Archaeology of Ancient China.
         New Haven and London, p. 59.
     11 Bishop, C. W. (i933)- op. cit. pp. 395~6-
     12 For evidence of crop cultivation in the Shang period Cheng, T. K. (i960),
         ibid., cites Yu Sheng-wu (1957). Agricultural products of the Shang
402   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication        WATSON


         Dynasty, J. Humanistic Studies: Peoples' University of the North East, i,
         pp. 81-107 (not available to the writer); and Wu Ch’i-ch’ang (1937). Yin
         agricultural practices as seen in the oracle records and bronze inscriptions,
         in Studies presented to Chang Chu-sheng, Shanghai, pp. 323-368 (but in
         this there is no mention of kaoliang); Ch’en Meng-chia (1956). ibid., does
         not identify any oracle text character with kaoliang.
      13 Yin Jan-chang and Li Chung-i (i960). Preliminary report on the second
         season of excavations on the site of San Li Tun, Hsin I Hsien, Kiangsu,
         K’ao ku, 7, pp. 20-2; the reference reads: “Being carbonized through
         burning the external appearance of the stalks was well-preserved. They
         were examined by Li Yang-han, Director of the Department of Agricul¬
         ture at the Nanking Institute of Agriculture, and determined as stalks of
         kaoliang from near the roots. Traces of leaves of kaoliang were also dis¬
         covered stratified in the cultural level.” The pottery (ting) and bronze
         knives found on the site indicate a date between the tenth and eighth
         centuries B.c.
      14 Dogett, H. (1965). The development of the cultivated sorghums, in
         Hutchinson, Sir J. (ed.) Essays on Crop Plant Evolution. Cambridge, p. 62.
      15 According to Dogett, H., Personal communication from Sir Joseph
         Hutchinson.
      16 Dogett, H. (1965). ibid.
      17 Chekiang Province Cultural Properties Control (i960). Report on the first
         and second seasons of excavations at the site of Ch’ien-shan-Yang in
         Wu-hsing hsien, Chekiang, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 2, pp. 84-7.
      18 Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of China (1963). op.
         cit., pp. 270-2.
Part IV: Studies of particular taxonomic groups
      Section i: Plants




      J. ALEXANDER & D. G. COURSEY

      The origins of yam cultivation


      Introduction

After the cereal grains, the staple food crops of most of the peoples of the
world are the so-called “root” crops, which include stems, rhizomes, corms,
bulbs, tubers and other types of organ as well as true roots. The origins and the
beginnings of the cultivation of these crops are generally obscure, although in
most cases, clear botanical evidence exists as to the continent of origin (e.g.
cassava or manioc is unquestionably of tropical American origin). The yams
present one of the most difficult and interesting cases for study.
  Yams are still important food crops, the annual world production being
estimated at twenty to twenty-five million tons1, and before the introduction
of American crop plants to the Old World, must have played a relatively more
important role than they do today. Ethnographic evidence from Africa and
Asia supports this, for the past importance of yams to many communities is
shown by the part they play in socio-religious events. A very wide range of
societies still have yam-based economies; some are comparatively primitive,
being until recently stone tool-using and organized in small isolated settlements;
others have developed high civilizations (amongst the highest in Africa) based
upon population densities of more than five hundred to the square mile.
  To the study of yam domestication three kinds of evidence, botanical,
ethnographic and archaeological, are relevant, but each kind is complicated
by special problems. The botanical by the presence of wild and cultivated
varieties through almost the whole of the humid and sub-humid tropics; the
ethnographic by the failure of observers to distinguish between yam species;
and the archaeological by the inability, at present, of field-workers to recover
direct evidence of yam cultivation2.
406   Part IV Plants    ALEXANDER AND COURSEY




      Botany
The yams, in the true sense of the word, are plants of the natural family
Dioscoreaceae, in the monocotyledonous order Liliales. By far the largest
genus of this family is Dioscorea itself, containing some six hundred species in
all, among which are numbered all the important species of edible yams. Two
other small genera, however, deserve passing mention: the tropical American
Rajania and the European Tamus, which contain the Carib Yam, R. cordata
and the Black Bryony, T. communis respectively. There are also a few other
minor genera (Avetra, Trichopus and Stenomeris), of no economic import¬
ance, in the Dioscoreaceae3.
  Before proceeding, it may be useful to clear up a misconception that exists
over the use of the word “yam”. Strictly, the word is applied only to members
of the genus Dioscorea and it is in that sense that it is used here. It is often
misapplied, however, especially by American writers, to include numerous
other tropical and sub-tropical root and tuber crops, principally the sweet
potato (Ipomoea batatas) but also to aroids such as cocoyams or taros
(Xanthosoma and Colocasia spp.) and arrowroots (Maranta spp.). The
“Elephant Yam” of India (Amorphophallus campamdatus) is also an aroid and
not a true yam. The so-called “yam belt” of the southern U.S.A. is actually a
region where sweet potatoes are extensively grown. In West Africa, a tuber¬
ous-rooted legume (Sphenostylis stenocarpa) is commonly referred to as the
“yam bean”, on account of the form of its root, as are also species of Pachy-
rhizus in Asia and Central America. The word “yam” is derived from the
West African Mande “niam” or Temne “enyame”, which was adopted as
“ynhame” in fifteenth-century Portuguese, or “name” in Spanish and spread
thence into other European languages4.
  Most species of Dioscorea and all those of importance as food crops develop
as underground tuber or group of tubers, from which an herbaceous “vine” is
produced annually, to die away at the end of the growing season. The yam
tubers are, organographically, derived from the stem. They are natural storage
organs, which enable the plant to survive during periods of inclement con¬
ditions—e.g. from one rainy season to the next—and it is these tubers that
form the edible part of the plant.
  In all Dioscorea which are normally used as food plants, the tuberous
system is renewed annually, the old tuber, in the natural state, withering
away as the vine develops during the growing season, to be replaced by a
new one formed towards the end of the phase of active growth. In some wild
species the underground system is perennial, and survives for the whole life
of the plant, becoming more or less lignified. Some of the Dioscorea, such as
those of the section Stenophora, are rhizomatous.
  The stem of the yam plant consists of a twining vine, adapted for climbing
among bushes, savannah trees or even forest trees. In the smaller species, it
                                              The origins of yam cultivation      407


may reach only two or three metres, but in the stronger-growing species, ten
metres is not unusual, and even more may be achieved. The male and female
flowers are borne separately, usually on different plants, and are incon¬
spicuous : they are, none the less, insect pollinated and not wind pollinated,
as has been suggested. The fruit, when formed, is a dry capsule, containing
seeds winged for dispersal by the wind. In many of the cultivated forms,
centuries of vegetative propagation has so reduced the sexual fertility of the
plant, that flowering is rare, and fertile seed is hardly ever, if at all, set.
  When grown as a crop plant, propagation is invariably by means of vegeta¬
tive “setts”, which consist of small tubers—in the case of those species which
produce many tubers; from bulbils, when these are formed; or, most usually,
from small pieces of large tubers.
  Stakes or ropes tied to trees are normally provided for the vines to twine
upon, to replace the support provided by the “bush” in the wild state. Such
staking is necessary in order to maximize yields.
  Representatives of the genus Dioscorea are to be found in most parts of the
tropics. A number of species also penetrate into the temperate parts of the
world, while a few are alpine in habitat. It is only among the tropical and
sub-tropical species, however, that yams of any value as food crops are
found. The natural distribution of the Dioscoreaceae in the world is shown in
Fig. 1.
  Within the tropics, species of Dioscorea are to be found almost wherever the
rainfall is sufficient for their growth—about 120 cm. annually—in both Old
and New Worlds, and in Australia. Various members of the genus are
adapted to rain forest and to savannah. A considerable proportion of the
members of the genus provide edible tubers, and some of these occur in most
parts of the non-arid tropics. Others provide poisons which are widely used
for hunting and fishing.
   The evolutionary history of the genus has been discussed fully by Burkill5.
It is sufficient for the purpose of this paper to note that the ancestors of the
Dioscorea, having evolved originally in what is now South-east Asia, appear to
have achieved world-wide distribution as early as the end of the Cretaceous
era. An alternative theory, based on cytological considerations, suggests an
evolutionary origin in Central Africa: this, however, is difficult to reconcile
with morphological taxonomy. Subsequently, evolution followed somewhat
varying paths in the Old and the New Worlds with the result that botanical
differences are marked between the species of the two hemispheres. Separa¬
tion of the Asiatic from the African ancestral forms appears to have taken
place later, during a period of desiccation in the Miocene era. There are there¬
fore closer relationships between the species of Asia and those of Africa, and a
single species occurs wild in both continents. This is D. bulbifera, of the
section Opsophyton, and there are appreciable differences between the two
 continental forms: the African form has been separated by some botanists as a
 different species.
Fig i The natural distribution of the Dioscoreaceae in the world.
     The full line encloses the tropical area in which the edible yams occur. Within the extensions
     enclosed by dashed lines, only atypical species, of no value as food crops, occur (e.g. Tamils, and
     sections such as Stenophora and Testudinaria).                  __
                                           The origins of yam cultivation        409


  Nearly all the Dioscorea of the Old World, except for a few aberrant species
which, not being food crops, do not enter the present discussions, have
chromosome numbers based on multiples of 10, and in a large number of
species, 2n — 40. The New World species which have been examined to date,
have all been found to have chromosome numbers based on 9. Some of the
cultivated species are high polyploids, with chromosome numbers ranging up
to in = 140. These high chromosome counts have been recorded principally
in those species which are most highly developed in cultivation, D. alata and
D. cayenensis (the latter species including D. rotundata, according to the
taxonomy followed by the author in question). A few cultivated forms appear
to have abnormal counts, based on multiples of 9, e.g. in = 36 or 45. It
has been suggested that such high polyploidy in cultivated forms is associated
with long periods of continuous vegetative propagation6.
  Of the many species of yam known, only comparatively few are of import¬
ance as crop plants. These fall naturally into three groups, according to their
geographical origins.


Asiatic Yams
The Greater Yam (also known as Water Yam
  or Winged Yam)                                  D. alata
The Lesser Yam (also known, incorrectly, as
  the Chinese Yam)                                D. esculenta
The Chinese Yams                                  D. opposita and D. japonica
                                                      (both often known by the
                                                      invalid taxon D. batatas)
The Aerial or Potato Yam                         D. bulbifera
Other Asiatic species utilized to some extent
  are:                                           D. hispida
                                                 D. pentaphylla
                                                 D. nummularia


African Yams
The White, or White Guinea, Yam                  D. rotundata
The Yellow, or Yellow Guinea, Yam                D. cayenensis
The Cluster or Bitter Yam                        D. dumetorum
The Aerial or Potato Yam                         D.     bulbifera     (the   African
                                                      form of this species has
                                                      been separated by some as
                                                      D. latifolia)
African species of minor use are:                D. preussii
                                                 D. praehensilis
                                                 D. sansibarensis
                                                 D. colocasiifolia
4io     Part IV Plants    ALEXANDER AND COURSEY


American Yams
The Cush-cush, Yampi or Mapuey                      D. trifida
Other American species, cultivated to some
  extent, and more in times before the intro¬
  duction of Asiatic and African species,
  include:                                          D. convolvidacea
                                                    Rajania cordata


  The most widely grown species are the Asiatic D. alata and the African
D. rotundata: these, together with D. cayenensis, D. nummularia, D. opposita
and D. japonica all belong to the section Enantiophyllum of the genus
Dioscorea. One of the characteristics of the yams of this section is the forma¬
tion of a single tuber—rarely two or three, and extremely seldom more—in
each season. The tubers often weigh as much as five to ten lei log rams each,
and in exceptional cases may weigh more than fifty kilograms, and be two to
three metres in length. These are the most typical yams: together, the six
species mentioned probably account for more than 90% of all the yams that
are actually grown for food, in the world. The minor African species, D.
praehensilis, D. preussii and D. colocasiifolia also belong to this section: all its
members have vines which twine to the right, whereas the other species of
yam mentioned twine to the left.
  The Asiatic D. hispida and the African D. dumetorum belong to the section
Lasiophyton, and form a cluster of medium-sized tubers, more or less fused
together. Their vines twine to the left, and bear compound leaves, usually
with three leaflets (most Dioscorea leaves are simple). These two species are
so similar that they have been classified as sub-species, but are now regarded
as distinct. Wild forms of both species are extremely toxic, owing to the
presence of alkaloids, but can be detoxicated by prolonged soaking in water.
 Many less toxic or non-toxic cultivars exist. To this section also belongs
 D. pentaphylla, which is generally similar.
      D. bulbifera (including D. latifolia). This yam, which belongs to the section
 Opsophyton, differs from most others in that it is the aerial bulbils, which are
 freely borne in the leaf axils, which provide the edible product: the under¬
 ground tuber is either small or absent. Many wild forms are toxic, though
 others produce bulbils so succulent that they can be eaten raw. Although
 widespread in cultivation throughout the tropics, it is nowhere a major food
 crop, to the same extent as some other species.
      The Lesser Yam, D. esculenta, is the only member of the section Combilium.
 Unlike the species discussed so far, it forms a large number of individually
 small tubers, each usually weighing only a few hundred grams: the under¬
 ground system of a newly-lifted plant superficially resembles that of the
 potato. The whole plant, although of climbing habit, is of smaller stature than
 the Enantiophyllum yams. It is seldom cultivated to such a large extent,
 although known and appreciated in most tropical countries.
                                           The origins of yam cultivation   411


  D. sansibarensis, of the section Macroura, hardly ranks as a cultivated plant,
although somewhat improved forms are known: it freely produces small
bulbils, as well as tubers which, in wild forms contain an alkaloid and are
highly toxic. It is a very large-growing species, believed, in many parts of
Africa, to possess magical properties.
  The indigenous American yams are today of minor economic importance,
having been largely displaced in cultivation by Asiatic and African species.
The most widely grown, D. trifida (section Macrogynodium) produces a
group of smaller tubers, rather after the manner of D. escidenta. The related
genus Rajania, which is restricted to tropical America, forms long, single
tubers, not dissimilar to those of the Enantiophylla.



      Ethnography

The ethnographic evidence for the use of yams may now be considered.
  Wild yams are harvested by hunter/gatherers and domesticated yams are
cultivated today in Africa, Asia and South America. No comparative study of
their social/religious customs and methods of cultivation seems to have been
published but the following generalizations can be made:
  In South-east Asia wild yams are known and prized by hunter /gatherers, in
Ceylon, the Andaman Islands, Malaya, the Pacific Islands and Australia. In
some areas slices of the tuber are even reburied for propagation. The toxins
are removed by pounding, shredding and soaking7 and are sometimes used in
fishing and hunting.
   Cultivated yams are grown from India to Fiji and from China to New
Guinea. They are major food crops in parts of Indonesia, New Guinea and
the islands of Oceania. The general technique after clearing and burning is to
fence a plot and then to plant tuber-fragments in mulched mounds. The work
is hard, continuous (both men and women taking part) and extremely skilful,
many species and cultivars being used to suit varying soils and climatic con¬
ditions. Digging sticks and hoes are the commonest tools used, but communi¬
ties are small and some were purely stone-using at the coming of Europeans8.
Cooking is usually by pounding or roasting. Religious ritual and belief are
often linked with the yam agricultural cycle and yams are much used in
ceremonies.
  Literary evidence shows yams to have been known in India in the sixth
century a.d. and in China in the second century a.d.
  In South America wild yams are eaten by hunter/gatherers in Eastern
Brazil and Venezuela. Shredding and soaking are employed to remove the
toxins9.
  Cultivated yams are widely grown as a secondary crop in Brazil and
Venezuela but nowhere are they a major crop10. After clearing and burning
the tuber-fragments are planted in low mulched mounds and regularly tended.
4i2   Part IV Plants     Alexander and coursey


They are interplanted with other crops and yields are low and communities
are small (o-6 per square mile). Only stone axes and hoes were in use prior
to European contact. Cooking processes include grating and soaking11. Yams
have no special religious connections, as far as is known, in America.
   In Africa wild yams are known and searched for by hunter/gatherers in the
rain-forests12. They are also used in time of famine by cultivators at the fringes
of the forest13 and in the savannah. The toxins are removed by soaking and are
sometimes used in hunting.
  Cultivated yams are grown from Guinea to Kenya and from Angola to
Uganda, but their importance varies greatly. Only in West Africa from the
Ivory Coast to the Cameroons are they at present a major food crop. There
have been suggestions that in Uganda and the Congo they were once much
more widely grown14.
 After clearing and burning, tuber-cuttings are planted in mounds or
ridges. These are mulched and the growing vines carried by living trees or by
poles. Population densities of up to 500 per square mile are supported15.
Hoes and rakes are the commonest tools used. Yams are usually interplanted
with other crops, great skill being shown in the choice of soils and species. The
apportioning of work between men and women varies greatly from region to
region16. Iron tools were commonly in use at the coming of Europeans but
some groups were still stone-using in the nineteenth century            A.D.,   and
memories of a stone-using period were preserved by others17. Cooking is
usually by pounding and mashing. Yams are used extensively in religious
ceremonies and some varieties are credited with magical properties. Events in
the yam agricultural cycle are widely celebrated18.



      Archaeology

It is apparent from this evidence that both wild and cultivated yams were
being utilized for food in most parts of the tropical world before historic
times and that only archaeology can solve the problems of their domestication.
The archaeological evidence is best considered separately in the three great
regions into which the botanical evidence divides (Fig. 2).

      Area I: South-east Asia


This region is the home of many species of cultivated yams. The principal
ones are D. alata, D. esculenta, D. nummularia, D. bulbifera, D. hispida and
D. pentaphylla, the first two named being the most widely grown. Many
other species are also cultivated but to a limited extent and in restricted areas.
The relative importance of the species vary greatly from one district to
another, although D. alata usually predominates, and throughout the area the
relative importance of yams to other crops also varies. Most peoples in the
Fig 2 The principal regions of yam cultivation.
414    Part IV Plants     Alexander and coursey


area have economies based in rice, and everywhere other “root” crops,
notably the aroids and sweet potato, compete extensively with the yams.


i S.E. Asian mainland.      D. alata. This species has never been found growing
wild, except in districts where it may have escaped from cultivation, but there
is nevertheless no doubt as to its Asiatic origin. The two wild species, D.
hamiltonii and D. persimilis, which are extremely close to it in botanical
characteristics are at home to the east and west of the broken country of the
upper reaches of the Irrawaddy, Salween, Mekong and Red Rivers (Fig. 3). It
seems likely that it was here that the selection or production of a plant derived
from the two wild species mentioned became D. alata. It is thus a true




Fig 3 The origins of Dioscorea alata.
      The areas marked h and p indicate the natural distributions of D. hamiltonii
      and D. persimilis, respectively. The cultigen D. alata is believed to have
      originated between the areas, near the point marked X'. A secondary centre
      of diversity of this species also exists at X, in Celebes (after Burkill, I. H.
      G924)- " list of oriental vernacular names of the genus Dioscorea, Gdns’ Bull.,
      Straits Settl 3 (4-6), pp. 121-244; and Burkill, I. H. (1951). The rise and
      decline of the Greater Yam in the service of man, Advmt. Sci., Bond., 7 (28),
      pp. 443-8-)                                                              ' V ;
                                             The origins of yam cultivation   415


cultigen, or product of cultivation. A more southerly origin, in the Malay
peninsula itself, is unlikely as it is an area with rainfall spread almost evenly
throughout the year and the wild yams of that area, having no severe dry
season to survive, do not possess large, esculent tubers like those of D.
hamiltonii and D. persimilis.
  D. esculenta has no closely related wild species, so its exact origin is some¬
what obscure. Botanically it is certainly Asiatic, although not Chinese in
origin, and it would appear likely that it was first taken into cultivation in the
same area as D. alata, while its subsequent spread also followed similar paths.
  Much closer to the wild forms are D. pentaphylla and D. hispida. D.
pentaphylla is a highly variable species as far as the quality of its tubers is
concerned: some are pleasant and harmless to eat, others nauseous and
highly toxic. It has been suggested that this wide variation may well have
provided a stimulus to selection by the more primitive cultivators, and this
species is currently at the early stages of ennoblement19.
  Most forms of D. hispida are highly toxic, owing to the presence of the
alkaloid, dioscorine, in the tubers, and are used as food only in times of
famine, after a lengthy processing to remove the alkaloid, involving alternate
soaking and drying of the shredded tubers. For this purpose, tubers are
collected mainly from wild plants, although it is possible that some ennoble¬
ment of the less toxic forms has taken place.
  The archaeological evidence from this area is still very scanty but a number
of relevant generalizations may be made.
  In Southern and Eastern Asia in the third and second millennia b.c., only
two distinctive complexes of cultural equipment have been recognized. Both
are first recognizable in the warm-temperate climatic zones; one in Central/
North China, the other in West Pakistan/North-west India; and both are
based on the cultivation of cereals. In the second millennium b.c. cultivated
wheat, millets and rice are present in both zones20. The ground stone tools and
pottery which are the commonest durable evidence in both complexes are
quite distinctive. In the region between them, that in which the domestica¬
tion of D. alata and D. esculenta probably took place, artifacts of both tra¬
ditions have been found and recent absolute dates indicate that some of them
belong to the late third and second millennia b.c.21 Excavation in Eastern
India has recently reinforced existing evidence of a movement of stone tool-
types, and probably pottery-types, westwards from the Chinese/Indo-Chinese
province at this time22. Whilst there is no indication of what, if anything,
these tool- and pot-makers were growing, the general nature of the equip¬
ment is that associated with agriculture elsewhere in India and China and
provides a context in which the domestication of local tubers might have
taken place. There is so far no earlier evidence from this entire region which
suggests agriculturalists of any kind.
  Further south in Malaya the present evidence from the second millennium
b.c. suggests connections with cultures further north in Indo-China23. There
416   Part IV Plants    Alexander and coursey


are no distinctive local cultures which might be associated with agriculture
nor is there any evidence suggesting any early or indigenous domestication of
yams. In this the archaeological evidence supports the botanical evidence24.


2 The Philippine, Malaysian and Indonesian islands.        Here D. alata and D.
esculenta exist in an enormous variety of cultivars and have longer and more
deeply buried tubers than the local varieties. The latter are sufficiently
numerous for a secondary centre of domestication in Celebes and the neigh¬
bouring islands to have been suggested25. The following deserve special
comment.
  D. nummularia is used as a food plant mainly in Indonesia and some of the
Pacific islands where it is of secondary importance. Nowhere does it seem to
be greatly ennobled, nor does it exist in any great variety of cultivars; although
it has considerable ritual significance in some areas26.
  D. pentaphylla is occasionally met with as a cultivated plant in many parts
of India, the Malay peninsula, the Philippines, Indonesia and Fiji. It is no¬
where an important crop plant and would appear to have been brought rather
fortuitously into cultivation at a number of widely separated places.
  D. bulbifera. The practices adopted for the cultivation of this species are
radically different from those used for other yams. The edible portion of the
plant is the aerial bulbil, which may be “harvested” from the vines of the
growing plant, after the manner of a fruit. Such an easily available food must
have attracted the attention of man at a very early date, and as might be
expected, the use of this plant as food occurs in many districts. As there are
no very great numbers of cultivars concentrated in any one part of Asia or
Africa, it is not unreasonable to assume that this species was brought into
cultivation in many places, independently.
  The archaeological evidence from this region shows stone and pottery
artefacts of the two mainland cultural traditions; the Chinese/Indo-Chinese
type being widespread through the coastal islands and the Indian/Pakistani
type through Indonesia27. There is at present no evidence to suggest an
independent development of agriculture earlier than the mainland28. This
appears to support the botanical evidence that the original domestication of
the main yam cultivars should not be looked for here.


3 Central and North China, most of Japan, the Ryukyu Islands and parts of
Korea. This is not today a very important yam-growing region, but deserves
mention as substantial quantities of the two very closely related species D.
opposita and D. japonica are grown here. Only a small number of cultivars are
known and they are not cultivated to a significant extent anywhere else in the
world. They are to be regarded as warm-temperate, rather than as tropical,
crops, in spite of their close botanical relationship to many of the major
tropical food yams. They are members of the section Enantiophyllum, and so
normally produce only a single, large tuber, which in most forms drives deeply
                                            The origins of yam cultivation   417


into the soil, making harvesting a laborious process. They are well adapted to
the area in which they grow, and where, without doubt they originated. They
have not, within the historical period at least, been crops of major importance.
In modern times they have been taken in cultivation to the Hawaiian Islands,
America and even, during the time of the mid-nineteenth century potato
famines, to Europe: in none of these areas, however, have these yams ever
become much more than horticultural curiosities.
  There is at present no archaeological evidence to suggest when they were
brought into cultivation. Literary evidence attributes their cultivation in
China to the mythical period before c. 1500 B.c.


4 The Pacific Islands east of Indonesia and Australasia.   In this region yams
of S.E. Asian types (notably D. alata, D. pentaphylla, D. bulbifera and D.
nummularia) were widespread at the time of the first European contacts. They
are not indigenous to the islands and botanical, ethnographic and archae¬
ological evidence all support a movement of people and cultivated plants
eastwards in the first and second millennia a.d.29 There is therefore no reason
to consider this region further, in connection with agricultural origins.


5 The westward spread of S.E. Asian yam cultivars.     Some cultivars (notably
D. alata and D. esculenta) are found in India, Ceylon, Madagascar, the coast
of East Africa, Central and West Africa, the Caribbean islands and in Central
and South America. Since Madagascar, Africa and South America have
indigenous wild and cultivated yams of their own, the problems of the
origins of cultivation are different from those of the eastern spread and
primarily relevant to the problems of local cultivars there. They may be
considered in three regions:

      (a) The coastlands of the Indian Ocean.   Elere the only certain evidence
      is literary, and it is established that cultivated yams were known in
      India by 600 A.d. (probably earlier) and in Madagascar well before
      1450 a.d.30 There seems no doubt that the references are primarily to
      D. alata.
        The archaeological evidence for this spread is twofold: firstly from
      the third millennium b.c. onwards there is considerable evidence for
      long distance trade between the highly sophisticated societies of W.
      Pakistan, N.W. India, the Persian Gulf and Arabia, but it is only in the
      first millennium b.c. that Ceylon, Indonesia and the S.E. Asian main¬
      land can be shown to take part in it. An earlier participation by Malays
      and Indonesians seems unlikely on present evidence for no highly
      developed societies of the kind likely to be interested in trans-Indian
      Ocean trade have been recognized at this period. Secondly from 300 b.c.
      onwards historical evidence makes such contacts more likely and from
      c. 150 b.c. onwards direct sailing across the ocean is well attested.
418   Part IV Plants    ALEXANDER AND COURSEY


      There is considerable archaeological evidence that the manufactures of
      the Chinese and Roman Empires were being exchanged by this route in
      the first two centuries a.d.31 Since yams were used from at least this time
      onwards by Malay sailors, this trade provides a context for the arrival of
      yams, and perhaps bananas (another S.E. Asian food favoured by
      sailors), on the east coast of Africa. These voyages would have been
      contemporary with the great Pacific voyages to the east32.
        On quite different evidence, linguistic and racial, a date between 300
      b.c. and 400 a.d. is generally accepted for the settlement of Madagascar
      by Malaysian people. These might well have brought D. alata to the
      island.

      (b) The spread into Central and West Africa.     When records began to
      distinguish the yam species growing here (in the last century) D.
      alata, alone of the S.E. Asian cultivars, was to be found in a few areas of
      the Congo Basin and in the “yam zone” of West Africa, and in many
      areas was distinguished linguistically from “proper yams” i.e. the local
      species33. Two other S.E. Asian cultivated plants, bananas and Colocasia
      were found in the same regions34.
        There seem to be two possible explanations for this: D. alata may
      have spread by land from the Kenya-Tanzanian coast at some time
      after 400 b.c.; or it may have been carried by sea round the Cape of
      Good Hope. If the latter, then it is likely to have arrived after 1498,
      when Portuguese are known to have been using it for sea-stores, rather
      than have been carried by Malay/Madagascans for whom there is no
      evidence of sailing in the Atlantic. If the former, then the African
      archaeological evidence for the early first millennium a.d. is important.
      Whilst there is general evidence of long distance trade eastwards from
      Katanga and Rhodesia in this miUennium35, and of folk movements out
      of the Congo Basin to the east and south, there is no evidence of any
      trade or movements into West Africa, especially across the Cameroon
      Mountains, which to this day form a major ethnic boundary. Indeed
      such evidence as there is suggests rather a southward movement from
      that region31'. If D. alata reached West Africa at this time there is no
      archaeological context at present in which to place it; it must also have
      been adopted very readily and local wild forms quickly brought into
      cultivation.


      (c) South America and the Caribbean islands.        Cultivars of South¬
      east Asian species (D. alata and D. esculenta) reached this region, to¬
      gether with some African ones, in and after the sixteenth century a.d.
      There is literary evidence that they were deliberately imported by
      Spaniards and Portuguese.
                                              The origins of yam cultivation    419




      Area II: West and Central Africa


This area is the home of a large group of cultivars of which D. rotundata and
D. cayenensis are principal37, and D. dumetorum, D. praehensilis, D. colocasiifolia
and D. preussii lesser, varieties.
  The limits of the main zone, growing 90% of all the yams in Africa, are
remarkably sharp (Fig. 4). The northern and southern are climatic, represen-




Fig 4 The West African yam zone.
      The full line encloses the area where yams are, traditionally, the staple food
      crop (after Miege, J. (1954). Les cultures vivrieres en Afrique occidentale,
      Cah. d’Outre-Mer, 7 (25), pp. 25-50; Coursey, D. G. (1965). The role of yams
      in West African food economies, Wld Crops, 17 (2), pp. 74-82; and Coursey,
      D. G. (1967). Yams. London, pp. 28-67.)


ting the boundary of minimum rainfall in the north, and the coastal swamps
and lagoons in the south. The western boundary coincides closely with the
Bandama River of the central Cote d’Ivoire, and the eastern to the Cameroon
Mountain chain38.
 In the remainder of Central and West Africa, yams are only cultivated to a
very limited degree, and they are only major crops in very restricted localities.
The same species are grown as in the main zone, but D. rotundata is less
important and the minor African yams more so.
  D. rotundata and D. cayenensis are best considered together, as they are
extremely close botanically, and the techniques of cultivation are virtually
identical. Most of the French botanists who have worked with the genus
420   Part IV Plants     Alexander and coursey

Dioscorea regard the former as being merely a subspecies of the latter39: the
term D. cayenensis in most French writing therefore includes yams that
British authors would refer to as D. rotundata. A detailed discussion of the
taxonomy would be out of place here, but it may be noted that D. cayenensis
sensu strictu is a forest species, adapted to a short dry season, and a correspond¬
ingly brief period of dormancy: the forms that may be referred to as D.
rotundata have a longer dormant period, adapted to the longer, fiercer dry
season of the savannah: they therefore tend to build up larger reserves in their
tubers, and are thus better suited for use as crop plants (an incidental advan¬
tage is that the tubers become more deeply dormant and therefore store
better). However, there are many intermediate forms, which have been fixed
as apomictic clones, by continuous vegetative propagation in cultivation,
which may represent hybrids, or merely variations within the species. Yams
essentially identical in their botanical characteristics with cultivated D.
cayenensis are known in the wild state through most of the forest zone of West
Africa. Like D. alata, D. rotundata is unknown in the wild state, and is
apparently a cultigen. It is possible that such wild species as D. abyssinica
and D. praehensilis may have played a part in its formation. D. rotundata is by
far the most important, and widely cultivated, species in West Africa.
   D. bulbifera. This species, which occurs wild throughout most of tropical
Africa, is cultivated to a limited extent in many areas. Its use doubtless arose
in much the same way as it did in Asia and Oceania, independently in many
districts. The African forms of the species (sometimes separated as D.
latifolia) are generally inferior to Asiatic ones, and appear to be even less
ennobled than the latter. The Asiatic forms are recognized by some African
peoples as having been introduced by Europeans.
   D. dumetorum. The wild and toxic species is so similar to the Asiatic D.
hispida that it was formerly regarded as a sub-species: it is now known to be
distinct. In parts of West Africa it has been ennobled in cultivation to a
considerable degree, and virtually non-toxic forms are quite extensively
grown, especially in the former Eastern Provinces of Nigeria. The process of
acculturalization of this species is still continuing: in 1901 Chevalier observed
plants of this species being collected from the wild state in Ubangui-Shari,
and those which were not immediately required for food being planted
around village compounds.
   Like D. esculenta the properties of the starch of this yam render it un¬
suitable for the making of the traditional West African dish, “fufu”: it is,
nevertheless much appreciated for other culinary uses.
   It is only in recent years that botanical research has shown this complex of
cultivars to be certainly African and in so doing has made much of the
previous theorizing invalid40.
   The ethnographic and archaeological evidence complement each other
particularly well in this region, for the ethnography shows that at the coming
of the Europeans there was no evidence of staple food crops other than yams
                                             The origins of yam cultivation    421

in the “yam zone” of West Africa. It is likely therefore that agriculture began
here only after local yams had been ennobled or foreign ones introduced. The
archaeological evidence is interpreted below as suggesting the former:
  In the savannahs immediately south of the Sahara, cereal-based agriculture
is attested in the third millennium b.c. and in the eastern and southern
savannahs early in the first millennium A.D. (but might have been there well
before this)41. This may mean that “domestication” as a concept was available
to forest dwellers in West Africa as early as the third millennium b.c. This is
supported by finds of savannah-type artifacts far south into the forest
margins at that period42.
  In the third and second millennia b.c. therefore, the contemporary situa¬
tions in West Africa and in the interior of S.E. Asia have more parallels than
was previously suspected. In both there was the possibility of contact with
well established cereal growing communities and there were hunter/gatherers
who in all probability then as now, knew and prized wild tubers, including
yams, which were suitable for cultivation43.
  A similar parallelism may be noted in the archaeological evidence, for on
the forest margins in Ghana and Nigeria as in S.E. Asia, complexes of ground
stone tools and pottery related to cereal agriculturalists’ types, are found in the
second and first millennia b.c.44 Whilst these cannot yet be associated directly
with agriculture, similar artifacts in the African savannahs certainly were in
the previous millennium. It may be, as Davies suggests45, that yams were
already being cultivated in Africa.
   If this were so then the later events in the area fall into place. At the coming
of the Europeans in the fifteenth century a.d. dense populations organized
into urbanized societies existed in southern Nigeria and around the mouth
of the Congo. The traditions of these societies stretch back to twelfth century
a.d. apparently based upon the yam cultivation46 which is still, as it was in the
seventeenth century, so interwoven with their religious and social life. The
complexity of the cultivation and the variety of cultivars of the indigenous
species might well mean that three millennia of development, rather than the
single one since the earliest possible introduction of D. alata, are represented.
That other urbanized societies developed in West Africa during and possibly
before the first millennium a.d. is well documented in ancient Ghana.
  It would seem that a good case exists for regarding the domestication of
yams in West Africa as being contemporary with and quite separate from that
in South-east Asia.

     Area III: South America and the Caribbean islands


The yams most cultivated in America today are Asiatic and African intro¬
ductions of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; D. alata, D. cayenensis,
D. rotundata, D. esculenta and D. bulbifera are all grown, especially in the
West Indies. The first named is generally the most popular, but in Jamaica
422   Part IV Plants   ALEXANDER AND COURSEY


and elsewhere in the Western Caribbean the African species are more
favoured.
  Although there are more species of Dioscorea indigenous to the New World
than to the Old, man in the Western Hemisphere has paid little attention to
them as potential crop plants, probably because of the availability of more
easily cultivated “root” crops such as manioc or cassava (Manihot esculenta),
tanias (Xanthosoma spp.), sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) and in the cooler
areas, Solatium spp. The one species that was fairly widely cultivated and to
some extent ennobled was D. trifida. This species appears to have a centre o
origin on the borders of Guyana and Brazil, where many forms are known,
and to have spread in cultivation through Trinidad northward along the
island chain, becoming progressively more highly selected, until in Jamaica
only one or two forms are known47. This pattern of distribution suggests an
original domestication and dispersal by the Arawak, but no very definite
information appears to be available.
  In one of the two surviving Carib communities, in Dominica, species of
Rajania (a small genus of the Dioscoreaceae, whose members are of similar
anatomy to the yams) are still grown to a limited extent. It is not highly
ennobled, and although common in the wild state, is not now cultivated else¬
where in the Caribbean48.
  A form of “protoculture” of D. convolvulacea, which is encouraged in
orchards and cocoa plantations, using the trees as supports, has been men¬
tioned in Costa Rica49.
  American yams have not been taken in cultivation to the Old World to any
significant extent, in marked contrast to the westward movement of both
Asiatic and African cultivars. There is at present no indication of how long
these have been in cultivation or whether the “Aje” referred to by Columbus
was D. trifida, another indigenous Dioscorea, or possibly some other crop50.
  It is certain, however, that root crops, in particular Manihot esculenta were
widely cultivated in pre-Hispamc times and that yams, which today play a
subsidiary role within that agricultural system, may well have played it then,
rhis is made more likely by the knowledge and use made of wild tubers,
including yams, by local hunter/gatherers. Since suggestions that roo.
cultivation might have been practised in the third millennium b.C. in this
region01 yams, as a minor crop, may well have a respectable antiquity here
and domestication may have been generally contemporary with that in the
other two areas. The parallelism between this and the African and Asian
regions also includes contiguity with an area which, by the third miUennium
B.C-, already had established an agricultural pattern (in this case Meso-
American), and the presence of hunter/gatherers appreciative of wild tubers
including yams.
  It may be therefore that there was an independent centre of yam domestica¬
tion in the New World not far removed in time from those of the Old World.
                                             The origins of yam cultivation    423




      Conclusions

On the basis of the evidence presently available, there is no reason to suppose
that the introduction of yams into cultivation occurred initially only in a single
area. Instead, the prerequisites of domestication are clearly seen to have
existed in three widely separated regions—South-east Asia; West Africa and
tropical America—and different species of yam were actually brought into
cultivation, and subsequentiy ennobled, in the three areas. Subsequent
movement of the cultivated forms has taken place, in historic times, the
Asian species being taken in cultivation to both Africa and America, and the
African species to America: this has tended to obscure the original pattern.
  The conditions which favoured the domestication appear to have been, in
all three regions, cultural interaction between people possessed of primitive
grain-based agricultural systems with others, still in the hunter/gatherer stage,
who were utilizing wild yams. These contacts seem to have occurred approxi¬
mately simultaneously, in all three regions, during the third millennium b.c.52



      Notes
      1 Coursey, D. G. (1965). The role of yams in West African food economies,
         Wld. Crops, 17 (2), pp. 74-82.
      2 Alexander, J. (In press). The domestication of yams, in Brothwell, D. R.
        and Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science and Archaeology. 2nd ed. London.
      3 Coursey, D. G. (1967). Yams. London, pp. 28-67.
      4 Burkill, I. H. (1938). The contact of the Portuguese with African food
        plants which gave words such as “Yam” to European languages, Proc.
        Linn. Soc., 150 (2), pp. 84-95; Corominas, J. (1954-7). Diccionario Critico
        Etimologico de la Langua Castellana. Madrid; Coursey, D. G. (1967).
        op. cit. pp. 5-27.
      5 Burkill, I. H. (i960). The Organography and the Evolution of the
        Dioscoreaceae, J. Linn. Soc. (Bot.), 56 (367), pp. 319-412.
      6 Sharma, A. K. and De, D. N. (1956). Polyploidy in Dioscorea, Genetica,
        28 (1-2), pp. 112-20; Martin, F. W. and Ortiz, S. (1963). Chromosome
        Numbers and Behaviour in some Species of Dioscorea, Cytologia, 28 (1),
        pp. 96-101; Martin, F. W. and Ortiz, S. (1966). New Chromosome
        Numbers in some Dioscorea Species, Cytologia, 31 (1), pp. 105-7.
      7 Forde, C. D. (1964). Habitat, Economy and. Society. London.
      8 Barrau, J. (1956). Les ignames alimentaires des lies du Pacifique sud,
        J. Agric. trop. Bot. appl, 3 (7-8), pp. 385-401; Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      9 Sauer, C. O. (1952). Agricultural origins and dispersals, Amer. Geog.
        Soc., Bowman Memorial Lectures, Series 2.
     10 Stewart, L. and Farron, M. (1959)- The Native Peoples of South America.
        New York.
     11 Metraux, A. (1948). in Steward, J. H. (ed.) Handbook of South American
        Indians, III. Bureau of American Ethnology, 143; Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
     12 Burkill, I. H. (1939). Notes on the genus Dioscorea in the Belgian Congo,
        Bull. Jard. bot. Etat., Brux., 15 (4), pp. 345~92-
     13 Okiy, G. E. O. (i960). Indigenous Nigerian food plants, J. W. Afr. Set.
         Sci.Assoc., 6 (2), pp. 117-21; Corkill, N. L. (1948). The poisonous wild
           *   *
15—DOPAA
424   Part IV Plants      Alexander and coursey


         cluster yam, Dioscorea dumetorum Pax., as a famine food in the Anglo-
         Egyptian Sudan, Ann. trop. Med. Parasit., 42 (3-4), pp. 278-87.
      14 McMaster, D. (i960). A subsistence crop geography of Uganda, Ph.D.
          Thesis, Univ. of London', Burkhill, I. H. (1939)- ibid.
      15 Gourou, P. (1966). The Tropical World. 4th ed. London.
      16 Irvine, F. R. (1963). A Textbook of West African Agriculture. London:
         Torto, J. O. (1956). The cultivation of yams in the Gold Coast, New Gold
         Cst. Fmr., 1 (1), pp. 6-8.
      17 Clark, J. D. (1963). Africa south of the Sahara, in Braidwood, R. J. and
         Willey, G. R. (eds.) Courses toward Urban Life. Edinburgh.
      18 Coursey, D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 197-203. A more detailed study of this
         subject is currently under preparation.
      19 Burkill, I. H. (1924). A list of oriental vernacular names of the genus
         Dioscorea, Gdns’ Bull., Straits Settl., 3 (4-6). pp. 121-244; Burkill, I. H.
         (1951). The rise and decline of the Greater Yam in the service of man,
         Advmt. sci., Lond., 7 (28), pp. 443-8.
      20 Watson, W., this volume, pp. 397-402; Allchin, F. R., this volume,
         PP-323-9-
      21 Sharma, T. (1966). Neolithic cultures of Assam, Ph.D. Thesis, Univ. of
         London; Sieveking, G. (1954-5). Excavations at Gua Cha Kalantan,
         Fed. Mus.J. {Malaya). 1-2, p. 75; Clark, J. D. (1964). World Prehistory.
         Cambridge; Solheim, W. G. (1968). Early Bronze in North-eastern
         Thailand, Current Anthropology, 9 (1), pp. 59-62.
      22 Sharma, T. (1966). ibid. See especially under Daojali Hading.
      23 Tweedle, M. (1953). The stone age in Malaya,^ R. Asiat. Soc., 26 (2).
      24 Sauer’s theory should, therefore, be abandoned.
      25 Burkill, I. H. (1924). ibid.; Burkill, I. H. (1951). ibid.
      26 Barrau, J. (1965). Histoire et prehistoire horticole de l’Oceanie tropicale,
         J. Soc. Oceanistes, 21 (21), pp. 55-78.
      27 van Heekeren, J. (1957). F/ze Stone Age in Indonesia. The Hague.
      28 With the possible exception of Taiwan (see Solheim, W. G. (1968). ibid.).
         The evidence is, however, too uncertain to be acceptable at present.
      29 Barrau, J. (1965). ibid.
      30 Burkill, I. H. (1924). ibid.; Burkill, I. H. (1951). ibid.; Wrigley, C. (i960).
          Speculations on the economic prehistory of Africa, J. Afr. Hist., 1 (2),
         pp. 189-203; Jumelle, H. and Perrier de la Bathie, H. (1910). Fragments
         biologiques de la flore de Madagascar, Ann. Mus. colon., Marseilles (2'
          Ser.), 8, pp. 1-96; Jumelle, H. (1922). Ignames sauvages et ignames
         cultivees a Madagascar, Rev. Bot. appl. Agric. trop., 2 (9), pp. 193-7.
      31 Wheeler, R. E. M. (1958). Rome beyond the Imperial frontiers. London.
      32 Barrau, J. (1963). Plants and migrations of Pacific peoples. 10th Pacific
          Science Congress. Hawaii.
      33 The other important Asiatic species, D. esculenta, was introduced only
         within the Colonial period in Africa. The Asiatic form of D. bulbifera is
         recognized by some African people, e.g. the Floup of Portuguese Guinea,
         as having been “brought by white men”; see Coursey, D. G. and Alex¬
         ander, J. (1968). African agricultural patterns and the sickle cell, Science,
          160 (3835), pp. 1474-5.
      34 Simmonds, N. W. (1962). The Evolution of the Banana. London; The
         other crop, Colocasia, may, as suggested by Burkill, I. H. (1938). ibid.,
         have come down the Nile valley, but there is no archaeological evidence
         which makes such a move likely. There is also no reliable evidence that
         Malay navigators ever penetrated into the Atlantic.
      35 Fagan, B. (1966). Southern Africa. London. (See especially Ingombe
          Ilede); Poznanski, M. (1961). Pottery types from archaeological sites in
         East Africa, J. Afr. Hist., 2 (2), pp. 177-98; Fagan, B. (1966). The Iron
         Age of Zambia, Current Anthropology, 7 (4), pp. 453-62.
                                        The origins of yam cultivation    425


36 Stevenson, W. Unpublished information.
37 Torto, J. O. (1956). This author suggests that about 80% of the yams
   grown in Ghana at that time were derived from two cultivars of D.
   rotundata; Coursey, D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 134-44. The figure given
   by Torto for Ghana is probably at least approximately correct for the
   West African yam zone as a whole; Chevalier, A. (1936). Contribution a
   l’etude de quelques especes africaines du genre Dioscorea, Bull. Mus. Nat.
   Hist. Nat., Paris (2e ser.), 8 (6), pp. 520-51.
38 Miege, J. (1954). Les cultures vivrieres en Afrique occidentale, Cah.
   d’Outre-Mer, 7 (25), pp. 25-50; Coursey, D. G. (1965). ibid.; Coursey,
   D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 22-5.
39 Chevalier, A. (1936). ibid.; Burkill, I. H. (1939). ibid.; Coursey, D. G.
   (1967). op. cit. pp. 59-60.
40 Murdock, G. P. (1959). Africa: its peoples and their culture history. New
   York. There is no point in discussing a wholly Asiatic origin for African
   yam cultivation, as this concept has now been discredited (see Coursey,
   D. G. and Alexander, J. (1968). ibid.)
41 Fagan, B. (1966). ibid.; Clark, J. D. (1963). ibid.
42 Davies, O. (i960). The neolithic revolution in tropical Africa, Trans.
   Hist. Soc. Ghana, 4 (2), pp. 14-20. Unpubhshed evidence from W.
   Stevenson suggests that derivation of these artifacts from local palaeo¬
   lithic sources, as proposed by Davies, is unlikely.
43 Isolated hunter/gatherer communities in both these areas still make
   extensive use of such wild yams and other “roots”.
44 Davies, O. (In press). Ntereso. Paper presented at the 8th Congress on Pre-
   and Proto-history, Prague (1966); Shaw, T. (1968). Radiocarbon dating
   in Nigeria. Ibadan, p. 10.
45 Davies, O. (1967). West Africa before the Europeans. London.
46 Coursey, D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 197-203, and further work under
   preparation. Festivals associated with yam cultivation were the major
   events in the annual socio-religious cycle in much of this area.
47 Henry, V. C. R. (1967). Studies on botanical and agronomic characteristics
   of cush-cush (Dioscofea trifida L.f.), Ph.D. Thesis, McGill Univ., and
   Private communication.
48 Chevalier, A. (1946). Nouvelles recherches sur les ignames cultivees,
   Rev. int. Bot. appl. Agric. Prop.-, 26 (279-80). pp. 26-31.
49 Leon, J. Private communication, from Instituto Interamericano de
   Ciencias Agricolas.
50 According to Leon, basing his opinion on Oviedo’s Historia General y
   Natural de las Indias, “aje” refers definitely to a white-fleshed form of
   sweet potato, not to any of the Dioscorea.
51 Rouse, I. (1962). The intermediate area; Amazonia and the Caribbean
   area, in Braidwood, R. J. and Willey, G. R. ibid.; Rouse, I. (1964). The
   Caribbean Area, in Jennings, J. D. Prehistoric Man in the New World.
   Chicago.
52 One of us (D.G.C.) is required to state that the opinions expressed here
   are his own and not necessarily those of the Tropical Products Institute.
      A. KRAPOVICKAS1

      The origin, variability and spread of the
      groundnut (Arachis hypogaea)

The origin and spread of the groundnut are of equal interest to ethnologists,
botanists and crop-scientists. Knowledge of this subject is certainly basic to
soundly based programmes for improving this important economic crop.
Several years have been occupied in the study of a large collection of South
American varieties maintained at the Experimental Station of Manfredi
(I.N.T.A. Cordoba, Argentina) and the time is opportune for a presentation
of conclusions drawn from this study. The material used consists of land races
(unimproved strains) collected from relatively unsophisticated cultivators in
some of the less readily accessible areas of Mexico, Peru and Bolivia. There
are, in addition, 1000 accessions collected in two expeditions to Paraguay,
Bolivia and Central Brazil with W. C. Gregory and J. Pietrarelli. The prime
object of these journeys was to collect material to clarify the taxonomy of the
genus Arachis and visiting the type localities of wild species. One area not
visited was the N.E. of Brazil, the original location of A. pusilla Benth.
  The author’s studies of variability within the cultivated species began with
descriptions of local varieties cultivated in central Cordoba Province, the
most important area of groundnut cultivation in Argentina2 and an analysis of
introgression in N.E. Argentina3.
   Material collected in Paraguay, Brazil and Bolivia has also been analysed
and this paper presents some of the results of this work and further observa¬
tions on Mexican and Peruvian material.



     Origin of Arachis hypagaea

The genus Arachis is confined to South America. It includes thirty species
and occurs in an area between the River Amazon and the Rio de la Plata and
from the Atlantic to the foothills of the Andes. The centre of origin of the
genus is probably in the Mato Grosso (Brazil) close to the Gran Pantanal.
Representatives are found there of all the sections into which we divide the
genus4.
428   Part IV Plants     krapovickas


  The outstanding morphological feature of this genus is the geocarpic fruit
produced by all species. In A. hypogaea the fruit has a single cavity which
contains 1-5 seeds. The characteristics of the fruits of wild species were
first described by Burkart5, the development of these fruits was interpreted by
Krapovickas and Rigoni6. In all wild species the fruit is articulated with two
single-seeded compartments, separated from each other by a filamentous
isthmus, the length of which varies according to species from a few milli¬
metres to about 20 cm. This must be due to the presence of two meristems in
the ovary one at the base, the other between the two ovules. In A. hypogaea
only the basal meristem functions which grows after fertilization to produce a
peg which buries the tip of the ovary. The ovules, once buried belowground,
grow and mature. The intercalary meristem normally fails in A. hypogaea
and for this reason the biarticulate pod may be considered as a wild character.
  The growth of the peg and isthmus is horizontal in the majority of species
from Central Brazil and may reach a length of one metre, flowers may be
aerial or subterranean. In A. hypogaea flowers are normally aerial and the
peg grows vertically both in the aerial and subterranean portions. This I
believe is important; from an area at approximately 57°W and westwards
there is an increase in the number of species with vertical peg development,
such types are commoner in the more peripheral areas.
  In attempts at interspecific hybridization attempted so far between A.
hypogaea and wild species more success is obtained when the wild species
pollen parent also has vertical peg growth than when this is horizontal7.
  The great majority of wild Arachis species are perennial but annual forms
are found in two district areas 2500 km. apart in the N.E. of Brazil and N.W.
Argentina and areas near the Bolivian frontier. In the latter area four species
have been found of which three are diploid and one A. monticola Krap. et
Rig. is tetraploid with 2n = 40 chromosomes. This species (from altitudes
1400-2800 m. above sea level in Argentina) is the only wild species to give
fully fertile hybrids with A. hypogaea. The only perennial species which can
cross with A. hypogaea to give viable hybrids are those with a taproot similar
to A. villosa Benth, 2n = 20 chromosomes and more or less vertical pegs.
Such hybrids have three genomes and are more or less sterile. The range of A.
villosa and its relatives is somewhat peripheral to that of the genus as a whole,
they occur to the west of the 57° meridian, that is west of a line marked by the
Rivers Paraguay and Uruguay. This evidence indicates that A. hypogaea has
originated farther to the west than had been thought previously and that it
arose in the periphery of the area occupied by this genus.
  It seems likely that A. hypogaea originated in Bolivia, at the base or in the
foothills ol the Andes. There exists in this area a very important centre of
variability of A. hypogaea subsp. hypogaea. This subspecies we believe has the
greatest affinity with the wild annual species and the perennials of the A. villosa
group shown by the occurrence of the runner habit, similar branching
pattern and absence of compound spikes.
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut     429


  It is curious that Bolivia is scarcely mentioned in older literature on the
groundnut yet it is not only an important centre of variation of the cultivated
forms but the area in which this crop plant arose. The diversity of use to
which groundnuts are put in the area indicates also that it has been present
there for a long time. In addition to the more customary uses it is employed in
the preparation of chicha de mani8 a refreshing non-alcoholic drink. In Santa
Cruz de la Sierra a soap is produced from it. In the woodland zone of
Northern Bolivia the natives eat the entire soft fruit with relish at the stage
when the pericarp is thick and juicy9.



      Intraspecific taxa of A. hypogaea

Earlier systems of classification have taken into account characters of the fruit
only10 or characters of the fruit together with habit, erect or prostrate11. Since
the importance of branching systems was recognized more rational classifica¬
tions have been produced12 and comparable results have been obtained from
cultivated peanuts of North America, Africa, Venezuela and Argentina.
  The study of branching habit and other vegetative characters is best
carried out on living plants which have been grown at low plant population
densities. Branching pattern has been correlated with the form and size of the
fruit, growth habit, the duration of the vegetative period, with seed dormancy
and with other characters. In this way it is possible to interpret the taxonomic
contributions of previous authors and understand their illustrations.
  In a previous work13 we proposed a taxonomic system dividing A. hypogaea
into two subspecies according to branching habit, alternate (subsp. hypogaea)
or sequential (subsp. fastigiata). A new varietal entity (var. hirsuta) which has
recently come to light should be added to this scheme.

Arachis hypogaea L.
  subspecies hypogaea
    var. hypogaea (= A. africana Lour.), the Brazilian type of Dubard14, the
          Virginia type of Gregory et a/.15
     var. hirsuta Kohler (= A. asiatica Lour.) the Peruvian type of Dubard16
          in part.
  subspecies fastigiata Waldron
    var. fastigiata the Peruvian type of Dubard17 in part, the Valencia type
          of Gregory et al.18
     var. vulgaris Harz, the Spanish type of Gregory et al.19

  The two subspecies are distinct entities, in addition to their morphological
differences they show divergence in physiological and genetical characters.
Groundnuts of subspecies hypogaea are generally prostrate, their seeds have
considerable dormancy, their vegetative period is long with a duration of from
5-10 months. In subspecies fastigiata plants are erect, the seed has no
430   Part IV Plants   krapovickas


dormancy and the vegetative period is short, 3-5 months, which permits two
crops per annum in some tropical areas. In crosses between the two sub¬
species we have observed progeny with lethal characters (albinos) or with
malformations. This confirms the observation of Hull20. Forms intermediate
between the subspecies are encountered much less frequently than those
intermediate between botanical varieties.



      The genocentres of groundnuts in South America

It has been possible by using Anderson’s method21 to analyse the patterns of
variability found in the indigenous strains of South America. It has been
shown for example that the great variability found in the Guarani region is
most probably due to introgressive hybridization. This has produced a
typical hybrid swarm from which we were able to determine the probable
prototypes which crossed freely among themselves and have as a result given
this region a special character. By extending this method to other areas of
South America we have identified different prototypes and we can delimit
distinct genocentres from a study of the patterns of variability produced.
  Although we are dealing with forms in cultivation at the present time, it is
possible to explain why the genocentres are static. In the localities visited
groundnuts were grown almost exclusively for subsistence, there was no
appreciable export trade nor had any cosmopolitan varieties been introduced
to these areas.
  At the present time we can recognize the following genocentres

1 The Guarani region, the basins of the Paraguay and Parana rivers
2 Goias and Minas Geraes (Brazil)
3 Rondonia and N.W. Mato Grosso
4 The Eastern foothills of the Andes in Bolivia
5 Peru.


      I The Guarani region


This includes a large part of the basins of the rivers Paraguay and upper
Parana bordering N.E. Argentina (Corrientes and Misiones), the East of
Paraguay, southern Mato Grosso and western Sao Paulo in Brazil. The
extent of this region eastwards is uncertain but it probably extends to the
Brazilian States of Parana, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul.
  The groundnuts of this region are almost entirely erect (subspecies
fastigiata); Valencia is the commonest form. The subspecies hypogaea is very
rare and is represented by two indigenous races, Guaycuru or Guanaco and
Rasteiro. These are very similar but are differentiated by testa colour,
salmon or reddish in Guaycuru and white with red streaks in Rasteiro \ the
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut     431


latter is characteristic also of the Overo variety of Argentina (Manduvi
Cabara or Mani cabra of Paraguay). These groundnuts occur along the length
of the upper Parana River and also in Ceres (Goias, Brazil). Rasteiro was
described as a species by Chevalier22 from fruits originating in Santa Catarina
(Brazil).
  In the Guarani region there is very little evidence of introgression between
the two subspecies of A.hypogaea, but there does exist a swarm of forms inter¬
mediate between the races belonging to subspecies fastigiata. In the course of
analysing this introgression we were able to identify the following prototypes,
all belonging to subsp. fastigiata

var. fastigiata Valencia and Porto Alegre
var. vulgaris Negrito and Spanish.

  Of these Porto Alegre and Negrito with dark violet testa colour are only
found in the Guarani region and their distribution can be regarded as co¬
inciding with the extent of this region. Valencia also occurs in the region of
Goias and Minas Geraes but specimens from this area show no evidence of
introgression. We have not found Valencia groundnuts in any of the other
three regions. It is possible that it has spread throughout the world from an
original location in Paraguay or Central Brazil and has given rise to numerous
cultivars, e.g. “Colorado de Cordoba” in Argentina and “Tatu” in Brazil.
  The “Spanish” groundnut characteristically has fruits with two seeds, the
testa is pale pink or light chestnut and abundant foliage is produced. We have
found it only in the Guarani region where it is most frequently found in N.E.
Argentina. It is not absolutely certain whether this race is truly indigenous in
this region or is a recent introduction. However, the Guarani region is a
centre of variation of the variety vulgaris and it is a reasonable assumption that
the Spanish groundnut has been disseminated from this region. There are
numerous cultivars of Spanish conformation, e.g. Macspan, Blanco Manfredi,
Dixie Spanish and Natal Common.


      2 The region of Goias and Minas Geraes


Our travels only covered the south of Goias and N.E. Minas Geraes but here
we met with a varietal pattern quite distinct from that of the Guarani region.
This region coincides with the basin of the River Tocantins and the river
San Francisco marks its eastward extent, here erect groundnuts (subsp.
fastigiata) predominate. We came upon only one example of subsp. hypogaea
in the vicinity of Ceres (Goias) which was like Rasteiro in having a red and
white testa.
  Cultivated races in this region belong in the main to subsp. fastigiata, both
varieties fastigiata and vulgaris are represented with little indication of
introgression between them. An important feature of this region is the
remarkable increase in frequency of the variety vulgaris, fruit size is larger
432   Part IV Plants      krapovickas


than in region i and is similar to that of the North American cultivars
Tennessee Red and Tennessee White. In our collection we have similar
material from Venezuela and Mexico. No material of Spanish type has been
collected in the area.

      3 The region of Rondonia and N.E. Mato Grosso (Brazil)


This region is not as yet well defined and requires further study, nevertheless
the data we have collected so far show that it has some very peculiar features.
The type specimen of A. nambyquarae Hoehne was collected in Pimenta
Bueno (Rondonia);this has a bi-coloured testa and we consider it belongs to
A. hypogaea subsp. hypogaea var. hypogaea. A. villosulicarpa also occurs in
the Mato Grosso23 cultivated by natives of Juruena and Diamantino. This
species is not closely related to A. hypogaea; it is diploid and perennial.
  In central Mato Grosso we have collected a number of erect groundnuts
with yellow testas, a colour not previously observed.
  This region is part of the Amazon basin and further exploration of this
river system will greatly increase our knowledge and enable us to elucidate
further its importance.


      4 The eastern foothills of the Andes in Bolivia


The outstanding feature of this region is the abundance of forms belonging
to subspecies hypogaea var. hypogaea. There is a great range of variability to
be found in habit and size of plant, in fruit characters and testa colour.
  The four representatives of var. fastigiata that we have collected from this
area are distinctly different from those of the other regions. We have not
collected any representative of var. vulgaris.
  In this region the groundnut is grown over a range of ecological con¬
ditions and at altitudes up to 2000 metres above sea level.
  In Bolivia we have observed several instances of introgression between the
two subspecies. The groundnut “Overo” or “Pintado” with red and white
testa occurs throughout the whole of Bolivia, this is frequently encountered
in the markets of La Paz, Cochabamba and Santa Cruz de la Sierra. It is a
different groundnut from Rasteiro or from Nambyquarae, because of its
semi-erect habit and its segregation for branching habit and seed coat colour.
It is possible that this form has arisen from crosses between var. hypogaea and
var .fastigiata. In Santa Cruz de la Sierra, we collected a form we have called
“Cruceiio” with plant habit and fruits similar to those of var. fastigiata but
with some features of “Pintado”. This could well be a product of intro¬
gression.
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut    433




     5 The region of Peru


In Peru we have collected two distinct types of groundnut, one very similar
to Virginia Runner, a common North American cultivar and the other with
fruits very similar to those found in the pre-Columbian tombs on the coast of
Peru. We presume that Virginia Runner is of recent introduction to the area,
the numerous collections made show little or no variability.
  The situation with regard the second type is very different. These are
characterized by very large fruits with marked constrictions between seeds,
very prominent veins and at the distal extremity a marked, parrot-like beak.
This type of fruit has been illustrated repeatedly in reports on pre-Columbian
remains from coastal Peru24 and is represented on pottery of the Mochica
culture. This groundnut may well be that which Monardes25 described from
the shores of the River Maranon thus “it is of the size of the middle finger,
round, twisted throughout, with a very neat design, its colour brownish, it
has inside a seed which rattles when dry somewhat like an almond with a
light-tan husk, it is white and breaks into two parts like an almond”.
  The fruits of the pre-Columbian type which we obtained in the Lima
market proved to belong to distinct types of plant, this suggests that we are
in a centre of variability for this groundnut. The fruits most like those of pre¬
columbian tombs belong to the subspecies hypogaea that is to say they are
prostrate, with alternate branching and late maturity and otherwise conform
to the description of the variety hirsuta Kohler (= A. asiatica Lour.). This
variety may show some peculiarities in its growth, for example the main axis
may grow to a length of a metre or more, far exceeding that of the runner
groundnuts of var. hypogaea. These groundnuts are still grown on the
Pacific coast.
  We have also found similar fruits, frequently coarser and with heavier
veins, belonging to subspecies fastigiala var. fastigiata. These have been
described and illustrated by Mazzani and Cobo26 under the name of “Tingo
Maria”. “Tingo Maria” does not appear to be the typical pre-Columbian
groundnut and probably originates in the woodland zone in Eastern Peru.
  Radiocarbon datings of groundnuts from Huaca Prieta in the valley of the
River Chacama at 850 b.c. have been obtained.
  There is general agreement on the nature of prehistoric Peruvian ground¬
nuts; however Towle27 points out that a smaller variety had also been found
with a slightly reticulated pericarp and without a dorsal ridge. This seems to
be rather similar to several cultivated varieties actually grown [in the U.S.A.
at the present time. This material was obtained in Lupe and is of the early
Ancon period.
  Dubard28 termed all these groundnuts “Peruvian type” but because he
used the number of seeds per pod as his principal diagnostic character, he
included Valencias in his Peruvian group. Valencias also have 3-4 seeds but
434    Part IV Plants    krapovickas


the fruit has no beak, no prominent ridges on the dorsal surface nor prominent
veins. Dubard’s “Peruvian type” includes both sequentially branched and
alternately branched forms. The alternately branched forms with 3-4 seeds,
rough pod with a parrot-like beak, the runner habit, fairly hairy and very late
maturing can be distinguished by the sum of these characters from Virginia,
Spanish or Valencia groundnuts.



       The relation between groundnut genocentres
       and indigenous tribes

A comparison of the genocentres described and the distribution of indigenous
ethnic groups in South America enables us to draw some very timely con¬
clusions. The existence of genocentres can be explained by geographical
isolation due to the great distances and the lack of contact between primitive
settlements. There is at the present time a dearth of information on the
groundnuts of the Amazon basin and the eastern foothills of the Andes from
Bolivia to Venezuela. Study of these regions would undoubtedly extend our
knowledge of the processes of domestication and spread of the groundnut.
  If we superimpose on the ethnic and linguistic map of South America29 the
present scheme of variation patterns of the groundnut we can see that
genocentre no. 1 coincides broadly with the distribution of the Guarani
Indians and no. 2 with that of the Ge people. The other three genocentres
each cover a mosaic of tribes. However it can be shown that there is some
affinity between genocentres no. 1 and no. 2 and none between these and the
remainder. In addition there is very little apparent affinity between groups
3-5-
  The establishment of relationships between these genocentres and the
indigenous cultures, although outside the scope of the present treatment, is
worth further detailed ethnological study. We suggest that for such a study
these possible correlations might serve as a useful working hypothesis.



       Spread of the groundnut

The groundnut is one of a number of American cultivated plants which
almost immediately after Columbus were disseminated and became estab¬
lished in the Old World. The rapidity of this spread has led some to postulate
an African origin, an opinion still to be seen repeated in some technical works,
but which has been discarded for the past century. The description of pre¬
columbian groundnuts from coastal Peru30 established the South American
origin of this plant31. Several theories have been elaborated to explain its mode
of spread.
  Right from the start comparative studies were made of the archaeological
                                 The origin and spread of the groundnut    435


groundnuts of Peru and those found in lands bordering the Pacific and
Indian Oceans (the Philippines, China, India, Madagascar, etc.) This
aroused interest in pre- and post-Columbian trans-oceanic relationships.
  Dubard32 was among the first to attempt an explanation of the spread of
groundnuts. He differentiated two types, the Peruvian with 3-4 seeds and the
Brazilian with 2 seeds per fruit. According to Dubard, the Peruvian type
similar to the pre-Columbian form of the tombs, must have been spread by the
Spanish in the Pacific basin and to Mexico and from there introduced to
Spain. The Brazilian type must have been distributed along the West
African coast by early Portuguese slave traders who bought it there.
  Bois33 split A. hypogaea into subspecies africana (Lour.) with prostrate
branches and asiatica (Lour.) with erect branches. According to Bois these
two subspecies correspond to the Brazilian and Peruvian types respectively,
of Dubard.
   Fruits similar to Peruvian archaeological groundnuts were mentioned and
illustrated by Skyortzow34 and by Ames35 from China. Anderson36 said “—the
most primitive type of peanut, the same narrow little shoestrings which are
found in the Peruvian tombs, are commonly grown today, not in Peru but in
. South China. How did they get there ?” The resemblances between Asiatic
and Peruvian groundnuts have been used to support theories of trans¬
pacific land connections. Merrill37 however denies the possibility of such
connections and supports the hypothesis that the spread of groundnuts
occurred along the old Portuguese trade route from Brazil to Goa and thence
to Canton and later Macau. This opinion of Merrill’s has been generally
accepted and illustrated in maps38.




      Spread in South America

Much light can be shed on this problem by studying the vernacular names of
A. hypogaea. The following list is based principally on information gathered
by I Gilii and Xuarez39, II Valdizan and Maldonado40 and III Rivet in
Chevalier.41

Betaca Pole              Mocobl42
Cacahuali                Piro, Chontaquiro (II)
Cacahuete                Mexican Spanish (I)
Cacuali                  Piro (II)
Curiquiere               Mojos (I)
Chemnakjai               Lenguas43
Choccopa                 Aymara (II and III)
Chocopan                 Araucanos44
Inchic                   Keshua (II)
Inchig                   Kichua quiteno (III)
436    Part IV Plants   KRAPOVICRSA


Inchik                   Peruvians and natives of Quito (I)
Inchis                   Kichua (III)
Inci                     Campa (II)
Inqui                    Antis (II)
Kadyahati                Hianakoto (Caribe) (III)
Kupekana                 Arawak (Tariana) (III)
Magua                    Guana45
Mandobi                  Brazilian Portuguese (I) Tupi (III)
Mandovi                  Pilaga46
Manduvi                  Chiriguano47
Man!                     Spanish American (I); Haiti (III); Aparai (Caribe)
                           (III)
Manobi                   Brazilian Portuguese (I) Tupi (III)
Manubi                   Guarani (I)
Maytapa                  Pacaguara (II); Pano (Pakaguara) (III)
Mondowi                  Tupi (III)
Mundubi                  Tupi (III)
Munui                    Tupi (III)
Naaquis                  Chiquitos (I)
Nioskita                 Choroti48
Sil’ari                  Itonama (III)
Tagalatic                Toba49
Tama                     Pano, Shipibo, Conibo (II)
Tlalcaca-huad            Mexican
Torah                    Colorado (III)
Yapiopeka                Tukano (Kobena) (III)
Yatubu                   Tukano (III)
Yaxtutu                  Tukano (Tuyuka) (III)
Yolique                   Mbaya (I)
Zebe                      Yurakare (II and III)


  The commonest names in use are “cacahuate” in Mexico, a name which in
Spain was transformed into “cacahuete”, in Brazil “amendoin” and in Para¬
guay “manduvi” and “main”. The latter is in fairly general use in the rest of
Spanish America, it is also the name mentioned by Oviedo50 from His¬
paniola. Reference to the above list shows that in the Tupi-Guarani
region there are numerous variants differing little from the actual name
“manduvi”. In the remainder of South America the names show little
affinity one with another. A large number of variants of “manduvi” occurs in the
languages from the eastern foothills of the Andes and between these linguistic
groups there are others having affinities with the Arawak tongues. The
Arawaks inhabit the area which extends from the Caribbean to the heart of
South America as far as the border of Bolivia with the Chaco.
   The presumed area of origin of A. hypogaea is in a region in which Arawak
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut   437


linguistic influences predominate and it is rather remote from those of the
 Guarani. In spite of this coincidence and also their wide dispersion in
America, I do not necessarily conclude that the Arawaks are responsible for
the spread of the groundnut from its centre of origin as far as the Caribbean
islands. Such a hypothesis is however consistent with the evidence available
at the present time.



       Spread outside South America

The progenitors of the whole range of cultivars now widely dispersed
throughout the world originally came from South America. It is possible to
place all of them in the botanical varieties described previously, groups
lower in the taxonomic hierarchy require further study.
   The runners of coastal Peru (var. hirsuta) appear to have had their origin in
this area. Similar forms however are still cultivated in Mexico where they are
called “chino”. This name has no geographical significance but signifies in the
vernacular “wrinkled”, referring to the prominent veins and ridges of the
pod. “Chino” varieties of Mexico conform to the Peruvian type in having
alternate branching, runner habit, similar fruit and seed with violet testas.
These are long established cultigens in Mexico and are illustrated in
Clavigero51. Only fruits are shown but this author mentioned a vegetative
period of seven months which confirms that this groundnut belonged to the
subspecies hypogaea.
  Heiser52 commented on the lack of historical information on pre-columbian
cultivation of the groundnut in Mexico but mentioned the discovery by
MacNeish of a groundnut found at Tehuacan of the period 200 B.C.-700 a.d.
According to Hernandez53 the groundnut was probably taken from Haiti to
Mexico by the Spanish; if this was so the introduction was probably of the
Virginia type, evidently the form grown in the Antilles.
  The groundnut was soon taken across the Pacific by the Spaniards. The
first introduction to the Malayan archipelago was between 1521-9 or perhaps
some time after 157954. According to Bolhuis the first crops were of the
variety Katjang tjina, a runner plant with small two-seeded pod, without
strong markings and a vegetative period of 8-10 months.
   The groundnut probably reached China (Fukien province) in the early
seventeenth century, possibly even before 160855.
  The observations and more particularly later descriptions and illustrations
of material from the Western Pacific and Indian Oceans indicate that it was
the Peruvian groundnut which spread throughout these regions. It has been
variously named Chamaebalanus japonicus56, Arachis asiatica57, l’Arachide de
l’lnde58, and Arachis hypogaea™.
   Virginia groundnuts of runner habit (var. hypogaea) were apparently
introduced to the South-eastern United States with the slave trade60. A range
438   Part IV Plants     krapovickas


of improved forms have been produced in this area (e.g. Virginia Bunch)
which have become widespread. In general morphology the Virginia ground¬
nut agrees with the descriptions and illustrations of groundnuts from the
Antilles of seventeenth-century authors du Tertre, Labat and Plumier61. As
yet no mainland locality has been found in South America in which the
Virginia type has been of ancient cultivation nor in which it shows any
appreciable variation, it should be pointed out that studies of variability are
lacking in the N.E. of Brazil and in the Caribbean. (The Virginia type does
however show a very considerable range of variation in the African
continent62.)
  There is more information about the Spanish type (var. vulgaris). Gilii and
Xuarez63 record its introduction to Europe. The plant is illustrated under the
name Glycine subterranea and came from seed sent in 1784 from Brazil to Don
Jose Campos in Lisbon part of which was sent on to Rome. The greater part
of the variability of var. vulgaris has been recorded in Paraguay and the
Brazilian States of Goyaz, Minas Geraes and Sao Paulo, and therefore Brazil
is a very likely source of the original Spanish type. There is no evidence
against the view that the Spanish type was that which was spread by Tabares
de Ulloa64 (1799) in Valencia and from there it was taken to the South of
France at the beginning of the nineteenth century. According to Higgins65
this groundnut was introduced to the U.S.A. from Spain in 1871 and to
Africa early in the present century.
  Information on the Valencia type (vav.fastigiata) in the literature is of more
recent date. Dubard66 described the fruit but the first use of the name
“Valencia” was by Beattie67 referring to a new introduction to the U.S.A.
from Spain. Tonnelier68 referred to a groundnut with 3-4 seeds/pod from
Cordoba Argentina which is probably the present cultivar “Colorado de
Cordoba” a Valencia type groundnut. The centre of variation of the Valencia
group is in Paraguay and Central Brazil and it is possible that spread took
place from South America in the present century, via Spain as the name
suggests. The Valencia type has actually been cultivated on the Mediter¬
ranean coast and from this area it has been sent not only to the U.S.A. but to
other parts of Europe in addition to Asia and Africa.



      Notes

      1 This paper was originally given in Spanish to the XXXVIIIth Congreso
        International de Americanistas in September 1966 at Mar del Plata,
        Argentina. The translation is by J. Smartt.
      2 Rigoni, V. A., Krapovickas, A., and Pietrarelli, J. (i960). Las variedades
        cultivadas de mani en la provincia de Cordoba, Rev. Invest. Aerie., 14 (2),
        pp. 177-96.
      3 Krapovickas, A. (i960). Hibridacion introgressiva en manies de la region
        guarantica argentina, Rev. Invest. Agric., 14 (2), pp 161-75
      4 Krapovickas, A. and Gregory, W. C. (In press).
                                The origin and spread of the groundnut        439


 5 Burkart, A. (1939)- Estudios sistemtaicos sobre les Leguminosas-Hedi-
   sareas de la Rep. Argentina y regiones adyacentes, Darwiniana, 3 (2), pp.
    117-302.
 6 Krapovickas, A. and Rigoni, V. A. (1957). Nuevas especies de Arachis
   vinculadas al problema del origin del mani, Darwiniana, n (3), pp. 431-55.
 7 Smartt, J. and Gregory, W. C. (1967). Interspecific cross-compatibility
   between the cultivated peanut Arachis hypogaea L. and other members of
   the genus Arachis, Oleagineux, 22, pp. 455-9.
 8 Weddell, H. A. (1853). Voyage dans le Nord de la Bolivie. Paris.
 9 Scolnik and Luti, Personal communication.
10 Burkart, A. (1939). ibid.; Chevalier, A. (1933). Monographic de l’Arachide,
   Rev. Bot. Appliq., 13, pp. 689-789; Dubard, M. (1906). De l’origine de
   l’arachide, Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat. Paris, Bull., 5, pp. 340-4; Hermann,
   F. J. (1951). A synopsis of the genus Arachis, U.S. Dept. Agric. Agriculture
   Monograph, 19; Hoehne, F. C. (1940). Arachis, Flora Brasilica, 25 (122).
11 Bois, D. (1927). Les Plantes Alimentaires chez tous les Peuples et a travers les
   Ages, I. Paris; Chevalier, A. (1929), L’origine botanique et l’amelioration
   des Arachides cultivees. Rev. Bot. Appliq., 9, pp. 97-197; John, C. M.
   Venkatanarayana, G. and Sheshadri, C. R. (1954). Varieties and forms of
   groundnuts, Indian J. Agric. Sci., 24 (4), pp. 159-93.
12 Bunting, A. H. (1955). A classification of cultivated groundnuts, Emp.
   J. Exptal. Agric., 23, pp. 158-70; Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and
   Yarbrough, J. A. (1951). Morphology, Genetics and Breeding, in The
   Peanut, the Unpredictable Legume. Washington; Krapovickas, A. and
   Rigoni, V. A. (i960). La nomenclatura de las subespecies y variedades de
   Arachis hypogaea L., Rev. Invest. Agric., 14 (2), pp. 197-228; Mazzani, B.
   and Cobo, M. (1957). Caracteristicas varieties del mani, Agronomia
    Tropical, 7 (3), pp. 109-49.
13 Krapovickas, A. and Rigoni, V. A. (1957). ibid.
14 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
15 Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951). ibid.
16 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
17 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
18 Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951)- ibid.
19 Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951)- ibid.
20 Hull, F. H. (1936). Inheritance of rest period of seeds and certain other
   characters in the peanut, Florida Agric. Exper. Station Bull., 314.
21 Anderson, E. (1949). Introgressive Hybridisation. New York.
22 Chevalier, A. (1929). L’Arachide Rasteiro du Bresil, Rev. Bot. Appliq., 9,
   p. 487-
23 Hoehne, F. C. (1944). Duas novas especies de Leguminosas do Brasil,
   Arq. Bot. Est. Sao Paulo, 2, pp. 15-18.
24 Costantin, J. and Bois, D. (1910). Sur les graines et tubercules des
   Tombeaux peruviens de la Periode Incasique, Rev. Gen. Bot., 22 (258), pp.
   242-65; Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.; Towle, M. A. (1961). The Ethno-
   botany of Pre-Columbian Peru. Chicago; Wittmack, L. (1887), in Reiss, W.
   and Stuebel, A. The Necropolis of Ancon in Peru, 3. Berlin.
25 Monardes, N. (1574). Historia Medicinal de las Cosas que se traen de
   Neustras Indias Occidentales que sirven en medicina. Sevilla.
26 Mazzini, N. and Cobo, M. (1957). °P- cit- Fi§- 4B-
27 Towle, M. A. (1961). ibid.
28 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
29 Steward, J. H. (ed.) (1950). Handbook of South American Indians, 6            .
   map 18.
30 Squier, E. G. (1877). Peru Illustrated. New York.
31 de Candolle, A. L. P. P. (1884). Origin of Cultivated Plants. London.
32 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
440   Part IV Plants      krapovickas


       33 Bois, D. (1927). ibid.
       34 Skvortzow, B. V. (1920). On some varieties of peanuts grown in China,
           J. N. China Branch Roy. Asiat. Soc., 51, pp. 142-5.
      35 Ames, O. (1939). Economic Annuals and Human Cultures. Cambridge,
           Mass.
      36 Anderson, E. (1952). Plants, Man and Life. Boston.
      37 Merrill, E. D. (1954). The Botany of Cook’s Voyages. Waltham, Mass.
      38 Olivier, M. (1954). Le marche mondial des arachides, OUagineux, 9 (2),
          pp. 125-8; Johnson, F. R. (1964). The Peanut Story. Murfreesboro, N.C.
      39 Gilii, F. L. and Xuarez, G. (1789). Osservazione Fitologiche sopra alcune
          Pliante Esotiche Introdotte in Roma fatte nell’anno 1788. Rome. Translated
          in Furlong, G. (1954). Gaspar Juares, S. J. y sus Noticias Fitologicas.
          Buenos Aires.
      40 Valdizan, H. and Maldonado, A. (1922). La Medicina Popular Peruana.
          Lima.
      41 Chevalier, A. (1933). ibid.
      42 Zapata GolHn, A., (1945). Nomenclature mocobi de animales y plantas,
          Bol. Dep. Estud. Etnogr.y Coloniales, 1 (1), pp. 51-62. Santa Fe.
      43 Cervino, P. A. (1910). Vocabulario Espahol y Lenguas, en Catal. Razonado
          de las Secc. Lenguas americanas por B. Mitre, 2. Buenos Aires. (MSS. of
          1839.) pp. 145-60.
      44 Abregu, V. C. (1942). Idiomas Aborigenes. Buenos Aires.
      45 Cominges, J. de (1892). Vocabulario de Algunas Palabras en Idioma Guana.
          Obras escogidas de Juan de Cominges. Buenos Aires, pp. 247-9.
      46 Da Rocha, A. C. (1938). Vocabulario comentado Pilaga-Castellano,
          Comision Honoraria de Reducciones de Indios, 7. Beunos Aires.
      47 Metraux, A. (1930). Etudes sur la civilisation des indiens Chiriguano,
          Rev. Inst. Etnol. Univ. Nac. Tucuman, 1 (3), pp. 295-494.
      48 Hunt, R. (1915). El choroti 0 yofuaha. Rev. Mus. La. Plata, 10 (2nd
          series), pi. 23.
      49 Tebboth, T. (1943). Diccionario Castellano-Toba, Rev. Inst. Antropol.
          Univ. Nac. Tucuman, 3 (2), pp. 35-221.
      50 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1535). Prhnera Parte deai Historia Natural y
          General de las Indias. Madrid.
      51 Clavigero, F. S. (1787). The History of Mexico, 1. London.
      52 Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1965). Cultivated plants and cultural diffusion in
          Nuclear America, Amer. Anthrop., 67 (4), pp. 930-49.
      53 Hernandez, F. (1790). Opera, 2. Madrid.
      54 Bolhuis, G. G. (1955). La culture de l’arachide en Indonesie, Oleagineux,
          I0> (3)5 PP- 157-60-
      55 Currington Goodrich, L. (1936-7). Early notices of the peanut in China,
          J. Orient. Stud. Cath. Univ. Peking, 2, pp. 405-9.
      56 Rumphius, G. E. (1747). Herbarium Amboinense, 5. Amsterdam.
      57 Loureiro, J. (1790). Flora Conchinchinensis. Lisboa.
      58 Cordemoy, C. J. de. (1866). Note sur L’Arachide (lie de la Reunion),
          Adansonia, 6, pp. 249-53.
      59 Blanco, M. (1878). Flora de Filipinas. (3rd ed.), 2. Manila.
      60 Higgins, B. B. (1951). Origin and early history of the peanut, in Gregory,
          W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951). ibid.
      61 Chevalier, A. (1933). ibid.; Higgins, B. B. (1951). ibid.
      62 Gibbons, R. W. and Harkness,C. In preparation; Bunting, A. H. (1955).
          ibid.; Bunting, A. H. (1958). A further note on the classification of culti¬
          vated peanuts, Emp.J. Exptal. Agric., 26, pp. 254-8; Meikle, J. O. (1965).
          A survey of African-grown groundnut varieties in Rhodesia, Rhodesia
          Agric. J., 62, pp. 109-13; Smartt, J. (1961). Groundnut varieties of
          Northern Rhodesia and their classification, Emp. J. Exptal. Agric., 29,
          pp.153-8.
                                 The origin and spread of the groundnut       441


  63 Gilii, F. L. and Xuarez. G. (1789). ibid.
  64 Tabares de Ulloa, F. (1799). Relacion Sucinta en que se explica sencillamente
     el nuevo descubrimiento de sacar el aceyte del cacahuate 0 Mani de America.
     Valencia.


VO vo vo vo
     Higgins, B. B. (1951). ibid.
     Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
     Beattie, W. (1911). The peanut, Farmers Bull., 431. Washington.
         r^OO
     Tonneher, A. C. (1912). Informe sobre el mani, Bol. Min. Agric., 14 (5),
     pp. 460-8.
      BARBARA PICKERSGILL

      The domestication of chili peppers


      Introduction

Chili peppers share with Phaseolus beans and the Cucurbits the distinction
of being among the first plants cultivated in the New World. Unlike the
latter crops, peppers never formed a staple part of the diet, but have always
been much-prized condiments. Both fresh and dried fruits contain a phenolic
compound, capsaicin, in the placentas, which gives them their characteristic
pungency.
  Several of the cultivated species of Capsicum are extremely variable. Bell
peppers, paprika, cayenne and the Mexican chilis are all forms of a single
species, C. annuum. This is the only species known to most Europeans,
although at least three others, C. baccatum, C. chinense and C. pubescens, are
still widely cultivated in South America, which is the centre of origin of this
genus.
  These species could be of recent origin; the products of a single domestica¬
tion followed by evolution and divergence under cultivation. Alternatively,
there may have been several distinct species before the development of
agriculture, each of which was subsequently domesticated from wild plants of
that species. These multiple domestications may have occurred independently
or the idea may have spread from one area to another, leading to experimen¬
tation with the rather different wild material available in different regions.



      Distribution of the domesticated chili peppers

Table i shows the probable pre-Conquest distribution of the principal
cultivated species of chili pepper. The most likely ancestor of cultivated C.
annuum is the wild bird pepper ( C. annuum var. minimum). This has a fairly
wide distribution, whereas cultivated C. annuum was limited to Middle
America in pre-Conquest times1. C. baccatum, on the other hand, has always
been restricted to South America. Wild plants (var. baccatum) occur only in
southern Peru and Bolivia. Cultivated types (var. pendulum) presumably
444    Part IV Plants     pickersgill


developed from these wild plants and are most frequent in Peru and Bolivia
but extend north up the west coast to southern Colombia. C. chinense has a
distribution which is complementary to that of C. baccatum, since C. chinense
attains its greatest diversity east of the Andes, in the Amazon Basin. It
extends also to the West Indies, and its range overlaps that of C. baccatum in
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia. C. chinense is closely related to, and possibly
originated from, a fourth species, C. frutescens. The latter includes the
cultivated Tabasco peppers and is widespread both as a weed and in cultiva¬
tion throughout Middle America and lowland South America. In highland
South America these species give place to a more hardy pepper, C. pubescens,
of which no wild forms are known.


Species                        Probable pre-Conquest distribution

C. annuum
   var. minimum   wild         Southern U.S., West Indies, Mexico, Central America,
                                 Colombia.
  var. annuum     cultivated   Southern U.S., Mexico, Central America.
C. baccatum
  var. baccatum   wild         Southern Peru, Bolivia.
  var. pendulum   cultivated   Southern Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, southern
                                 Brazil, northern Chile, and Argentina.
C. chinense       cultivated   West Indies, lowland South America south to Bolivia and
                                 southern Brazil.
C. frutescens     wild and     Mexico, Central America, lowland South America south
                    cultivated   to Bolivia and Brazil.
C. pubescens      cultivated   Highland South America.


Table i Pre-Conquest distribution of the cultivated species of Capsicum.


   Since there are wild plants related to most of the cultivated varieties, and
since the different species are separated by well-marked barriers to gene
exchange2, it is probable that these species existed before the development of
agriculture and that each was domesticated independently. Moreover, since
the species have somewhat distinct ranges even today, they were probably
domesticated in different areas by different groups. It is, of course, possible
that the wild varieties found today represent weedy plants descended from
cultivated varieties, but studies on their cytology and ability to intercross3
suggest that the wild varieties are more closely related to one another, and
hence closer to any common ancestor of this group, than are the cultivated
varieties.
   Little is known about a number of other species of limited distribution. In
Bolivia, fruits of C. cardenasii and C. eximium are collected and sold in the
markets, and the same is true of C. praetermissum in south-eastern Brazil.
Toleration rather than cultivation of useful but weedy peppers is character¬
istic also of primitive agricultural systems in Amazonia, where peppers seldom
seem to be sown deliberately but spontaneously germinating plants are
preserved even if they come up in the middle of the manioc patch or banana
                                         The domestication of chili peppers   445

grove. Peppers probably occupied a similar privileged status as tolerated
weeds in the initial stages of their domestication.



      Changes occurring under domestication

 Chili peppers are particularly favourable for studying evolution under
 domestication since so many of the species contain both wild and cultivated
varieties. These can be crossed and the genetic bases of the differences
between them studied. The archaeological record, although incomplete, may
date some of the stages in their domestication.
   Wild peppers all have in common small, red, pungent fruits, which may be
spherical, oval, conical or elongate, borne erect on the plant, and deciduous,
i.e. readily separating from the persistent calyx. The seeds are probably
dispersed by birds, attracted by the bright colour of the exposed fruits and
seen feeding avidly on the flesh of even the most pungent varieties. Under
cultivation, one of the first changes to occur was loss of this dispersal mech¬
anism. Since man was growing the plants for their fruits, he selected, con¬
sciously or unconsciously, for non-deciduous fruits which would remain on
the plants until harvested. This character is controlled by a single major gene,
and the dominant allele produces deciduous fruits4, so once a mutation to the
recessive, non-deciduous allele had occurred it would be relatively easy to
eliminate deciduous fruits by selection. The position of the fruits also
changed from erect to pendant. This was perhaps in part a consequence of the
increased size and weight of the fruit in cultivated forms, but a mutation to
pendant would again protect the crop from bird damage, since pendant fruits
are hidden amongst the foliage and not conspicuous.
   Size, shape and colour of the fruits also varied enormously under human
selection. Observations of this type have repeatedly been made on cultivated
plants, leading to the generalization that variability is greatest in that part of
the plant that is of economic importance. Red, orange, yellow and brown
fruits developed independently in all four cultivated Capsicum species and
there is also much parallel variation in fruit shape.
   Another effect of domestication seems to have been a shift to increased self-
pollination. Comparison of wild and cultivated varieties shows that wild
plants have relatively long styles exserted beyond the anthers, while in
cultivated plants the stigma is at or near the level of the anthers, so that self-
pollination is more likely. Self-incompatibility, reported for some wild species
of Capsicum, is unknown in cultivated varieties. Increased inbreeding could
have been caused by selection by man for high fruit set, or for plants which
bred true from seed, or by movement of the crop into an area in which
natural pollinating agents were uncommon. Once self-pollination is estab¬
lished, several distinct types can be grown in a small area without losing their
identities by intercrossing. Standley5 reported a practice among the Indians of
446   Part IV Plants    pickersgill

Guatemala which, if widespread, would also increase the amount of inbreed¬
ing. He stated that varieties of maize and beans “are often very local and
carefully guarded, but not because they are believed superior to varieties
grown by neighbours. The Indians cherish a firm belief that it is best to plant
seeds grown on the premises. Otherwise the plants would never be happy;
they would become homesick, as it were, pine away, and the crop would fail.”



      The archaeological record

Chili peppers have been identified from sites in both Middle and South
America. In Mexico, peppers have been recorded from MacNeish’s excava¬
tions in Tamaulipas6 and Tehuacan7. In both areas peppers are present in the
earliest levels, dating back to about 7000 b.c. This antedates the development
of agriculture and implies that wild plants were being exploited. These
Mexican specimens have sometimes been assigned to C. frutescens, but I
have seen photographs of broken fruits from Palo Blanco levels at Tehuacan
(700 b.c.-a.d. 200) and these relatively large fragments with the calyx still
attached look to me more like cultivated C. annuum.
   In South America, chili peppers have been found in sites on the coast of
Peru. Peppers are thus far unknown from pre-agricultural sites in this region,
which suggests that they did not occur wild here but were introduced from
elsewhere. The first plants cultivated were apparently gourds and squashes8,
but by 2000 b.c. peppers were grown in the Ancon area on the central coast9
and at Huaca Prieta on the north coast10. I have studied material from both
 areas and consider that these specimens came from cultivated, not wild,
 plants. Fruits from the lowest levels in both areas had the calyx attached,
 which suggests that the non-deciduous character, typical of cultivated plants,
 was already established. At Huaca Prieta, both red and orange fruits were
 present in the lowest levels, which again suggests selection under cultivation,
 since orange fruits are unknown among wild forms. Seed width also falls
 within the range of cultivated rather than wild plants.
    If the material is in good condition it is possible to identify more precisely
 the cultivated species represented in sites in South America. C. pubescens can
 be distinguished from C. baccatum and C. chinense by its black seeds, but it
 has not yet been recorded archaeologically. C. baccatum and C. chinense both
 have straw-coloured seeds, but C. baccatum has a toothed calyx with prom¬
 inent veins, while in C. chinense the calyx is entire and the veins less con¬
 spicuous. The fruits from Ancon and the lower levels of Huaca Prieta
 represent C. baccatum. This species was domesticated in southern Peru or
 Bolivia11. The material from both Huaca Prieta and Ancon belongs to the late
 Preceramic Stage and during this stage cotton, Canna and Canavalia beans
 also reached the coast, probably spreading from the same centre as C.
                                        The domestication of chili peppers   447


baccatum. This suggests that southern contacts played an important part in
the development of coastal cultures at this time.
   The Huaca Prieta specimens show that C. baccatum was gradually improved
under human selection. Seeds and fruits increased in size and deciduous
fruits were eliminated. However, in H.P.3 D2 and succeeding levels, mean
seed width decreased, deciduous fruits reappeared, and the shape and calyx
characters of some of the fruits suggest that a second species, C. chinense, at a
less advanced stage of domestication, was introduced. The centre of diversity
of C. chinense today is east of the Andes and its domestication was probably
connected with the development of agriculture in the tropical forests. It may
well have spread in association with manioc, which apparently reached the
coast of Peru at about the same time as this pepper.
   As more archaeological material becomes available, it should be possible to
assess more accurately the interplay between different areas of the New
World on the basis of changes in the cultivated plants. Present evidence
indicates that agriculture developed along surprisingly independent lines in
Mexico and Peru12. Even when die same crop was cultivated in the two areas,
it was often represented by different species, as for example the amaranths,
chenopods, Canavalia beans and chili peppers. In Peru, on the other hand,
although one might expect the desert coast and the Amazon jungles to have
been effectively isolated by the barrier of the high Andes, contact between the
different regions seems to have been effective and prolonged, as shown by the
presence of manioc, peanuts and C. chinense, domesticated in the tropical
forests, in prehistoric sites on the coast.



       The historical record

Chili peppers were a new and valuable spice to Europeans at a time when the
desire to obtain spices was providing a considerable impetus to exploration.
They were the most important spice encountered by Columbus in his un¬
successful attempt to find a route to the East Indies. Several of the Spanish
chroniclers thus devoted considerable space to these peppers.
  Perhaps Cobo13, who travelled throughout much of Spanish South America
early in the seventeenth century, has given the best description of the vari¬
ability then present in chili peppers. He reported that “one is as large as limes
or large plums; another, as small as pine nuts or even grains of wheat, and
between these two extremes are many different sizes. No less variety is found
in colour. . . . The same difference is found in form and shape; for one is
round; another, elongated, and others, of many other forms. . . . Finally, the
different kinds of peppers found in these Indies are so many that they exceed
forty.” Garcilaso de la Vega14 mentioned both yellow and brown fruited
forms [and both Acosta15 and Oviedo16 reported sweet varieties. It is thus
clear that the great variability in these peppers was established by the time of
448   Part IV Plants    pickersgill


the Spanish Conquest and was not a product of the trade and opportunities
for hybridization created by European colonization.
   It is difficult to identify the species recognized today in the chroniclers’
descriptions. The rocoto, described by Cobo17 as having a leaf “very different
from the other kinds of pepper, for it is much larger, not as smooth, of a dark
green” is probably C. pubescens, since this species has hairier leaves than most
cultivated varieties and is still called rocoto today. Oviedo18 described a pepper
which “has (small green fruits) mottled with black, . . . not the whole fruit,
but some part of it”. This is almost certainly C.annuum var. minimum, which in
Colombia is gathered while the fruits are still green. It has not proved possible
to distinguish between C. chinense and C. baccatum in the chroniclers’
accounts.
   All the chroniclers agree on the importance of peppers to the Indians.
According to Cobo19, “pepper holds first place, after maize, as the plant most
common and of greatest esteem amongst the Indians”. The fruits were used
in stews or soups, with meat or fish, and the leaves could be used to make a
sauce similar to parsley20. Salt and tomatoes were sometimes used to temper
the pungency of the fruits21. Besides being used fresh, the fruits were pre¬
served by pickling, which was the form preferred for sea voyages22, or by
drying.
   The value of pepper fruits to the Indians, and the fact that they could be
preserved and stored for some time, may have led to their becoming a form of
money in Peru, in the same way that cacao beans did among the Aztecs.
According to Valcarcel23, “under the Inca money was not known and certain
preferred products like peppers were perhaps the rudiments of a monetary
system. Until a few years ago one could shop in the plaza of Cuzco with the
so-called ‘Rantii’, which was a handful of peppers.”
   Not surprisingly, in view of their secular importance, chili peppers also
figured in religious belief and custom. One form of the Inca creation myth
names the four brothers who emerged at the beginning of the world as Manco
Capac, who became the first Inca, Ayar Cachi (Cachi = salt), Ayar Uchu
(Uchu = chili pepper) and Ayar Sauca (Sauca = pleasure). The allegorical
interpretation given by Garcilaso24 is that “by the salt they say that the
instruction which the Ynca gave in the rational life is to be understood. The
pepper represents the delight they received from this teaching, and the word
for pleasure is to show the joy and satisfaction in which they afterwards
lived.”



      Summary

The evolutionary history of chili peppers is being traced by a combination of
morphological, cytogenetical and archaeological studies. At least four species
were grown, in the New World at the time of the Spanish Conquest and these
                                          The domestication of chili peppers     449


species seem to have undergone parallel but independent domestication and
selection in different areas. Chili peppers are among the most ancient culti¬
vated plants and may prove as valuable as some inorganic artifacts in tracing
cultural contacts in the Americas25.



      Notes
      1 Smith, P. G. and Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1957). Taxonomy of Capsicum
        sinense Jacq. and the geographic distribution of the cultivated Capsicum
        species. Bull. Torrey Bot. Club, 84, pp. 413-20.
      2 Smith, P. G. and Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1957). Breeding behaviour of culti¬
        vated peppers, Proc. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci., 70, pp. 286-90; Eshbaugh,
        W. H., III. (1964). A numerical taxonomid and cytogenetic study of certain
        species of the genus Capsicum, Ph.D. thesis, Indiana University; Pickersgill,
        B. (1966). The variability and relationships of Capsicum chinense Jacq.,
        Ph.D. thesis, Indiana University.
      3 Pickersgill, B. 1966). ibid, and unpublished data.
      4 Lippert, L. F., Smith, P. G., and Bergh, B. O. (1966). Cytogenetics of the
        vegetable crops. Garden pepper, Capsicum sp., Bot. Rev., 32, pp. 24-55.
      5 Standley, P. C. (1946). Food plants of the Indians of the Guatemalan
        highlands, J. Arnold Arbor., 27, pp. 395-400.
      6 Kaplan, L. and MacNeish, R. S. (i960). Prehistoric bean remains from
        caves in the Ocampo region of Tamauhpas, Mexico, Botanical Museum
        Leaflets, Harvard University, 19, pp. 33-56.
      7 MacNeish, R. S. (1964). Ancient Mesoamerican civilisation, Science, 143,
        PP- 531-7-
      8 Lanning, E. P. (1965). Early man in Peru, Scientific American, 213, pp.
        68-76.
      9 Moseley, M. E., Personal communication.
     10 Bird, J. (1948). America’s oldest farmers, Nat. Hist., 57, pp. 296-303 and
        334-5-
     11 Pickersgill, B. Unpublished data.
     12 Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1965). Cultivated plants and cultural diffusion in
        Nuclear America, Amer. Anthrop., 67, pp. 930-49.
     13 Cobo, B. (1653). Historia del Nuevo Mundo. Reprinted in 1956 in Biblio-
        teca de Autores Espaholes, 91. Madrid. The quoted passages have been
        translated from this reprint.
     14 Garcilaso de la Vega, I. (1609). Comentarios Reales. Primera parte. Trans¬
        lated and edited by C. R. Markham for the Hakluyt Society Works, 2 (45),
        London. 1871.
     15 Acosta, J. de. (1590). Historia Natural y Moral de las Indias. Translated
        in 1604 by E. Grimston and edited by C. R. Markham for the Hakluyt
        Society Works, 60 and 61, London. 1880.
     16 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de. (1547). Historia General y Natural de las
        Indias. Reprinted in 1959 in Biblioteca de Autores Espaholes, 117, Madrid.
        The quoted passage has been translated from this reprint.
     17 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.
     18 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de. (1547). ibid.
     19 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.
     20 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.; Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1547). ibid.
     21 Acosta, J. de. (1590)- ibid.
     22 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.
     23 Valcarcel, L. E. (1925). Del ayllu al imperio. Lima. The quotation has been
        translated from the Spanish.
450    Part IV Plants    pickersgill

      24 Garcilaso de la Vega, I. (1609). ibid.
      25 The work reported here was supported in part by a grant from the
         National Science Foundation of the United States to Dr. C. B. Heiser,
         Jr., who supervised the thesis from which this paper has developed. I
         should like to thank the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia,
         Mexico City, for photographs of pepper fruits from Tehuacan; Dr. M.
         Towle for loan of the specimens from Huaca Prieta in the Harvard
         Botanical Museum; and Mr. M. E. Moseley for making available speci¬
         mens and unpublished data from his excavations at Ancon.
      J. SMARTT

      Evolution of American Phaseolus beans under
      domestication

      Introduction

 Studies of crop plant evolution are of interest to both the plant breeder and
 the archaeologist. The plant breeder cannot hope to understand the present
 state of his crop plants without some knowledge of their evolutionary history
while the archaeologist needs to know the role which specific crops played in
the life of human communities in the past and for how long they have been
significant in them.
    Many botanists, geneticists and agriculturists have been interested in
studies of crop plant evolution. Typical of the kind of work which has been
done is that of Simmonds1 on bananas, Hutchinson et al2 on cotton and
several others3. Most evolutionary studies of crop plants have been a by¬
product of straightforward plant breeding projects. In the effort to broaden
the genetic base of a given crop plant land races or relatively “unimproved”
varieties were first exploited followed by ancestral wild forms and related
species. As a result of such work a more or less clear picture of probable
phylogenetic relationships has frequently emerged over a period. In the
present study this approach could not be used. The great mass of taxonomic
and genetical data necessary simply was not available.
   In the present world food situation the actual and potential importance of
the protein rich grain legumes is such that much more detailed study is re¬
quired before much improvement can be made in them. To form some idea
of the evolutionary history of a group of plants such as the New World species
of Phaseolus it has been necessary to consider the published evidence available
and where necessary to try to fill gaps as far as possible by further experiment
and observations. This work began in early 1965 at the School of Agriculture,
Cambridge under the direction of Professor Sir Joseph Hutchinson. A
considerable range of Phaseolus material had already been assembled and this
was added to quite considerably during the course of the work.
452   Part IV Plants    smartt




      Taxonomy

The genus Phaseolus belongs to the tribe Phaseoleae of the Leguminosae and
is related to other genera with cultigens such as Vigna and Dolichos. The more
conservative authorities consider that the genus Phaseolus contains about 150
species4. This number is probably inflated by synonyms, Mackie5 listed
18 for one species (Phaseolus lunatus L.) alone and this is probably not
exceptional.
   Four distinct groups can be recognized easily within the genus namely

1 Phaseolus proper or Euphaseolus6: the large seeded American beans
2 Macroptilium1: very small seeded American forms
3 Azukia8: rather small seeded Asiatic forms
4 Caracallae9: forms with characteristic “snail flowers”.

These groupings consist of forms which have similar flower and pod morph¬
ology which have been grown at Cambridge and are by no means a complete
breakdown of the genus. The taxonomic treatments of the genus available
at the present time are not only unhelpful but positively misleading; de
Candolle, Taubert and Piper10 all place some closely related species in
different sections of the genus. The quality of much of the herbarium
material available is very poor, without flowers very often and inadequate
for reliable determination in many cases. A modern taxonomic revision of
this important genus is long overdue.
   The New World cultivated species Phaseolus vulgaris L., Ph. coccineus L.,
Ph. lunatus L. and Ph. acutifolius A.Gr. were selected for study because they
are most widely disseminated members of the genus and adequate material
was available. Although accurate figures of the world production are not
available, it is probable that Ph. vulgaris is the most widely cultivated,
followed by Ph. lunatus and Ph. coccineus in that order with Ph. acutifolius in
the lowest rank. These beans have all come to the Old World in post-
Columbian times.



      Archaeological record

The archaeological record for Phaseolus in the New World is most impressive.
Kaplan11 has reported radiocarbon datings of 7000 b.p. for Ph. vulgaris from
Tehuacan, Mexico, 5300 B-p- for Ph. lunatus from Chilca, Peru, 5000 b.p. for
Ph. acutifolius from Tehuacan, Mexico and 2200 B.P. for Ph. coccineus also
from Tehuacan with a possible earlier dating of 7500-9000 b.p. from Ocampo
in Mexico. These dates take us up to early agricultural times in America, yet
Kaplan has reported that seed and pod material of Ph. vulgaris was basically
                                   Evolution of American Phaseolus beans      453


similar to modem beans. This suggests that the development of beans similar
to modem types occurred quite rapidly in early agricultural times.
   Kaplan has also concluded that Ph. lunatus was domesticated independently
in Pern and Mexico, these different domesticates can be distinguished easily
on seed size, the large, Peruvian macrospermus and the smaller Mexican
microspermus type. It seems quite probable that domestication of Ph. vulgaris
has been equally if not more complex; the present complex pattern of
morphological variation in Ph. vulgaris could be perhaps a result of a
complex pattern of domestication.
   Because beans have such a long history under domestication it is possible
that the divergence between the cultivated and wild forms has been so great
as to make it difficult to relate cultigens to their wild progenitors. There is the
additional possibility that the four species now in cultivation had a single wild
progenitor. Both questions can be resolved easily; wild forms of all four
species, obviously related to the forms in cultivation can be found. We can
conclude that the origin of specific rank differences between the four species,
all of which incidentally are diploid with 2n = 22 chromosomes, preceded
domestication.
   Kaplan has also pointed out the dietary importance of beans. Bean seeds
are rich in lysine and tryptophane, two essential amino-acids deficient in
maize. The two crops complement each other and together produce a reason¬
ably balanced diet. In the absence of domesticated animals this combination
of crops is highly advantageous and even at the present time, notwithstanding
 the introduction of cattle and other domestic animals, Phaseolus beans still
make an important contribution of protein to the Mexican diet.



      Comparative morphology of wild forms

      1 Growth habit

The wild forms of the four Phaseolus species we are considering have basically
the same growth habit. This they share with other wild species such as Ph.
polystachyus (L.) B.S.P., which have produced no cultigens. Ph. polystachyus
is called the thicket bean and its habit of growth enables it to become estab¬
lished and survive in such a plant community. The main axis is slender and
ascending and may reach a length of several feet, six or even more. Lateral
branches are produced profusely which initially are not ascending but grow
out more or less horizontally and straight for considerable distances (two
or three feet, perhaps more) before assuming the twining and ascending
pattern of growth. In this way thicket vegetation can become thoroughly
infiltrated by the growth of these plants in a relatively short time.
   Some differences in response have been observed in experimental cultiva¬
tion. The primitive form of Phaseolus coccineus {Ph. formosus H.B.K.) when
454   Part IV Plants    smartt


grown in open ground does not climb or scramble but first covers the soil
with a mat of vegetation, only when this is done will it climb. On the other
hand primitive Ph. vulgaris (ssp. aborigineus Burk.) is climbing in open
ground; in greenhouse cultivation however both forms are climbing from the
outset.

      2 Flower, fruit and seed characters

Lilac flowers are found in all four species in the wild. In addition red and
pink flowers are found in wild Ph. coccineus (the pink flowered individuals are
hybrid) and white flowers are found in some northern collections of Ph.
vulgaris ssp. aborigineus.
   Basic flower structure is very similar indeed in all four species. Size of
flowers is greatest in Ph. coccineus, least in Ph. lunatus. The stigmatic surface
is outwardly directed or nearly terminal in Ph. coccineus (JPh. formosus) and
inwardly directly in the others. This is associated with a greater tendency to
cross-pollination in Ph. coccineus. Self-pollination is perfectly feasible, the
stigmatic surface however requires scarification before pollen will grow in Ph.
coccineus-, this is not required in the other three species. The young pod is
rather fleshy in Ph. vulgaris and Ph. coccineus but fibrous in Ph. acutifolius
and Ph. lunatus. The number of seed per pod is characteristically never more
than four in Ph. lunatus but may range up to eight or nine in the other
species.
   Testa colour and pattern is basically similar throughout the four species
(and also Ph. polystachyus). This is basically grey or brown with a dense
pattern of darker spots and blotches. Self-coloured testas do occur, black-
seeded Ph. lunatus and Ph. vulgaris and buff-seeded Ph. coccineus (formosus)
have been collected from the wild.
   Seed dormancy occurs as a rule due to “hard-seededness”, in addition Ph.
acutifolius requires a post-harvest maturation period before germination can
occur.
   Flowering and fruiting in Phaseolus may be affected by day length, a
common enough occurrence in plants from low latitudes. In the Cambridge
collection of Phaseolus, wild representatives of Ph. vulgaris have the most
rigid photoperiodic requirement; one accession from N.W. Argentina does not
flower before October under normal day lengths in England. Other lines will
flower earlier than this but not usually until the summer solstice is past. It is
possible to induce such forms to flower in Spring by early sowing in the
greenhouse. Two distinct types of photoperiodic response have been
observed, the first for a specific day length and the second for a declining
day length. This subject merits detailed study under carefully controlled
conditions.
  In addition to photoperiod-sensitive lines, day-neutral strains can be found
which will flower at almost any time of the year under long or short days.
                                  Evolution of American Pbaseolus beans      455




      3 Variability in wild populations

The sampling of wild populations we have been able to make is much smaller
than we would have liked but it does indicate that the variability within each
species in the wild may be quite considerable. Some of the conclusions we
might draw from the changes we believe to have followed domestication
must be subject to the proviso that such differences might already have
existed in wild populations, though perhaps not extensively. There can be
little doubt however that in the early days of domestication, progress in the
improvement of beans was assisted by the variability which existed in the
populations of the wild form of a given species.



     Ecological considerations

In nature all four species do not occur together in the same habitat. A range of
habitats is exploited from the cool, moist montane conditions in which Ph.
coccineus flourishes to the arid, semi-desert conditions in which Ph. acutifolius
is found. Warm temperate conditions are optimal for Ph. vulgaris whereas Ph.
lunatus grows best in the tropics and sub-tropics.
   The environments which the members of this genus can exploit cover an
enormous geographic range from Scandinavia to New Zealand; it is regret¬
table that these valuable plants are not exploited more fully, especially in the
tropics where they could provide additional protein for human nutrition.

     Response to domestication


The New World cultigens in the genus Phaseolus provide an opportunity to
test Vavilov’s principle of homologous variation. One would expect responses
to be qualitatively similar and to a considerable extent they are. Of course the
selection pressures to which the different species have been exposed are
different and the differences in response under domestication will in all
probability reflect this. This does not of course exclude the possibility that
the species have inherently different capacities to respond. The actual re¬
sponse must therefore depend on both the capacity for response and the
intensity of selection imposed.

     1 Morphological responses

(a) Growth habit.    The most obvious effect of domestication on most
Phaseolus is the modification of growth habit. To take Phaseolus vulgaris as an
example, the physical difference in growth form between the wild ssp.
aborigineus and a cultivated dwarf French bean variety is enormous. The
16—DOPAA   *   *
456   Part IV Plants    smartt


differences between climbing or “pole” varieties and the wild forms are less
but they are none the less real.
   The major difference between wild and climbing beans on the one hand
and the dwarf varieties on the other is principally in branching pattern. In the
wild and climbing forms growth is indeterminate, the axes continue to grow
indefinitely whereas in most dwarf varieties after the production of seven or
eight nodes or less, growth of the main axis is terminated by an inflorescence.
Lateral branches are terminated in a similar fashion. This difference is under
very simple genetic control, by a single locus. Typical 3:1 ratios are given in
F2 for crosses indeterminate X determinate in Ph. vulgaris, Ph. coccineus and
Ph. lunatus12.
    The differences between primitives and climbers are rather more subtle.
 In both the main axis is ascending and behaves similarly. The behaviour of
 the lateral branches is quite different. In the primitives these are numerous
 and can grow to enormous lengths. In cultivated climbers these are very
 considerably reduced in number and if they grow to any considerable length
 are ascending from the outset, there is no diageotropic tendency. In the most
 advanced climbers the growth form is pyramidal, the first laterals are the
 longest, successive branches are progressively shorter. Laterals are often
 produced only at the first seven or eight nodes.
   The selection of growth habits has been related to development of agricul¬
 tural practice. It is generally believed that maize and beans were grown
 together. The maize stalks provided support for climbing beans. However if
 beans with the wild growth habit were grown, unless the maize plants were
 well separated the whole plot would become an enormous tangle by the time
either the beans or maize were mature. A reduction in the production of
lateral branches is clearly advantageous in these circumstances. This seems to
have come about by selection at the polygenic level. Among domesticated
climbing beans there is a considerable range of variation in the extent to
which lateral branching is suppressed.
   After a period of mixed cropping of maize and beans, single crop cultiva¬
tion was probably attempted and in these circumstances the dwarf-determin¬
ate growth habit was advantageous. In nature or in mixed cultivation the
dwarf determinate mutation would have been effectively lethal. It is of course
on the dwarf-determinate form that the present commercial production of
beans for canning and processing is based. Man has here preserved and
propagated a key mutant in Phaseolus on which its future as a crop plant has
depended. Kaplan13 has mentioned vegetative remains of a dwarf bean 800
years old which was found in Tamaulipas. Since differences in seed characters
are not correlated in any way with growth habit nothing can be inferred in
regard to the growth form of more ancient material.
   Ojehomon11 at Cambridge studied comparatively the development of
indeterminate and determinate forms of Ph. vulgaris and has suggested that
the terminal inflorescence of a determinate is equivalent to the axillary
                                Evolution of American Phaseolus beans      457

inflorescence of an indeterminate at the seventh or eight node on the main
axis. That is the lowest node which bears an inflorescence. Froussios (un¬
published) has classified three distinct growth forms on the basis of both
growth habit and branching pattern these are:

1 Indeterminate climber
2 Indeterminate bush or dwarf
3 Determinate bush or dwarf.

To this list the class indeterminate-scramblers represented by the primitive
forms can be added.
   The full range of growth forms can be found in Ph. vulgaris. No dwarf-
indeterminates have been reported in Ph. coccineus and Ph. lunatus; however,
all cultivars of Ph. acutifolius are of this type.

(b) Size of vegetative plant parts.  We have considered how under domesti¬
cation the production of lateral branches has been reduced in the climbers
and the length of the main axis and lateral branches has been curtailed in
dwarf forms. Without compensating increases in the size of plant parts, stems
and leaves principally, it is doubtful whether the plant could have responded
successfully to selection. A determinate mutation in the genetic background
of Ph. vulgaris ssp. aborigineus would have produced a spindly plant perhaps
six inches high with very low productive capacity. It seems probable that
what has happened is that selection for increase in leaf and stem size proceeded
hand in hand with that for reduction in production of lateral branches. The
genetic control of these could well be independent. Certainly experimentally
produced F2 progeny from the cross Ph. coccineus cr. Hammond’s Dwarf
Scarlet X Ph. coccineus {Ph. formosus) show segregants combining the
determinate dwarf habit of the cultivar with the small leaf of the primitive
parent.
   The consequences of domestication have been reductions in the number
of branches and leaves with a compensating increase hi leaf size together with
correlated increases in stem diameter. When the new balance was struck in
the climbers, the determinate mutant became viable in cultivation because
the individual plant had sufficient leaf area to produce an adequate yield of
crop.
   The response pattern outlined has been recorded in all species but Ph.
acutifolius. In this species leaf and stem size have not increased, the plant
habit is bushy rather than climbing and no determinate forms have become
established.

(c) Changes in reproductive plant parts.    Flower size is appreciably larger in
cultigens of Ph. coccineus and Ph. vulgaris than in primitive forms but little or
no change has apparently occurred in Ph. acutifolius and Ph. lunatus. Changes
in flower colour have occurred: white flowers are found in cultivated Ph.
458   Part IV Plants     smartt


coccineus, Ph. lunatus and Ph. acutifolius but not in the wild, and lilac flowers
are found among the cultigens of all species except Ph. coccineus. Every
species therefore has two common flower colour variants, red and white
in Ph. coccineus and lilac and white in the other species.
   The most important change which has taken place in the reproductive
parts is pod and seed size. Seed number per pod has not changed significantly
except in Ph. acutifolius in which up to nine seeds may be found in wild forms
but rarely more than six in cultivars. Pod and seed size has increased most in
Ph. coccineus; primitive pods rarely if ever exceed three inches in length. Pods
of cultivars with the same number of seeds may be well over a foot in length.
The weights of individual seeds of any wild species do not usually exceed
o-i gm. by very much; the seed of cultivars of Ph. coccineus may be as much as
i-o gm. in weight. Seed weight has increased by a factor of about eight. In the
other species increases in pod and seed size have not perhaps been as great but
in Ph. vulgaris and Ph. lunatus they are none the less striking and a five- or
six-fold increase at least has been achieved in some cultivated varieties. In Ph.
vulgaris there is a continuous range of seed size from the primitive to the
largest seeded cultivated form. In both Ph. coccineus and Ph. lunatus there is
at the present time a very sharp discontinuity between primitive and culti¬
vated races in seed size. A much less striking increase in seed size has occurred
in Ph. acutifolius, probably only by a factor of three.
  Preliminary studies have begun on the inheritance of seed size in Ph.
coccineus. The indications are that it is determined polyfactorially but no
estimate of the number of effective factors can be made at the present time.
  One of the most remarkable features of cultivated beans is the enormous
range of testa colours and patterns which can be found. Four main colour
groups have been identified in Ph. vulgaris; similar groups doubtless occur
but have not been studied as extensively in other species. They are white,
black, red and brown. Superimposed on these ground colours may be various
patterns of spots, flecks, stripes and eyes. The genetics of basic testa colours
is fairly simple with probably at least two loci involved; that of the
patterns is more complex.
  An important property of the testa is its permeability to water. Wild
species are characteristically hard-seeded and unless the seed surface is
abraded do not absorb water readily. Kaplan15 considered that the loss of this
property was an important factor in the domestication of beans. Cultivated
beans as a rule absorb water readily through the testa without abrasion.
Rathjen11’ at Cambridge has found that hard seed may be produced by Fx
intervarietal hybrids in Ph. vulgaris. These hybrids were between lines of
poor genetical combining ability and much of the seed was rather poorly
developed. It has been suggested that the relative growth of embryo to testa
is greater in cultigens than in wild forms and that stretching increases
permeability. In the reported instances where embryo growth is poor the
testa is unstretched and may be impermeable as a result.
                                     Evolution of American Phaseolus beans    459

   Pod structure is basically similar in wild forms and the more primitive
 cultigens. In cultigens generally there is a tendency for dehiscence to be
 reduced without necessarily any gross change in anatomical structure. Apart
 from this consideration no other change has occurred in the pods of Eh.
 lunatus and Eh. acutifolius, under domestication both are very fibrous. Pods of
 Eh. vulgaris and Eh. coccineus are even in the wild state less fibrous than those
of Eh. lunatus and Eh. acutifolius. Under domestication the fibre content of
the pods has been further reduced, more so in Eh. vulgaris than in Eh.
coccineus. Three distinct pod textures are found in Eh. vulgaris namely:

 1 parchmented—very fibrous—dehisces strongly at maturity
2 leathery—less dehiscent—splits readily along the sutures
3 stringless—indehiscent—does not split readily along the sutures.

   Varieties with parchmented pods are used entirely for dry seed production,
leathery podded varieties can be used either for green pod production when
young or haricot production when fully mature. Stringless beans are used
entirely for the production of green pods.


     2 Change in life form


Eh. coccineus and Eh. lunatus are perennial species fundamentally although in
cultivation frequently treated as annuals. The determinate forms of both
species show a tendency towards the annual life form. Eh. vulgaris ssp.
aborigineus includes both annual and perennial forms, the accessions in the
Cambridge collection from Argentina are annuals, a single accession from
Mexico is perennial and produces a similar type of root-tuber to Eh. coccineus
and Eh. lunatus. Eh. acutifolius is a strict annual.
  There is a tendency under domestication for selection towards the annual
life form, this is reinforced by the ever increasing use of determinate dwarf
forms.

     3 Ehysiological responses


(a) Fhotoperiod sensitivity. The genus Ehaseolus in America has its centre of
distribution in tropical and sub-tropical latitudes. Collections of cultivars
from this area almost invariably include forms which are photoperiod
sensitive. Photoperiodic response shows a range from day-neutral to a require¬
ment for a twelve hour day for flower induction. In Eh. vulgaris photoperiod
sensitivity is not confined to any particular morphological type and is found in
them all, likewise day-neutrality. The occurrence of varying degrees of
photoperiod sensitivity in wild forms suggests that the alleles for day length
sensitivity have never been fixed. The migration of Eh. vulgaris into North
America in pre-Columbian times ensured that day-neutral alleles were fixed
in these populations but not in those near the centre of origin.
460   Part IV Plants    smartt


  Segregations in F2 of hybrids between a photoperiod-sensitive primitive
and a day-neutral cultivated type gave typical monofactorial ratios of 3
sensitive : 1 day-neutral. The range in photoperiod sensitivity suggests that
other genetic loci may influence the expression of this character.


(b) Seed dormancy.     In addition to dormancy imposed by hard seed, there is
dormancy in primitive Ph. acutifolius which is apparently imposed by a post¬
harvest maturation period. There is some evidence that this may also occur in
Ph. vulgaris ssp. aborigineus. In general, however, no difficulty has been found
in germinating fairly fresh seed (i.e. within two months of harvest) of other
species.

      Experimental hybridization

Crosses have been made experimentally between primitive and cultivated
forms of all four species. Fertility of the Fx hybrids has been perfectly normal
with very few exceptions and F2 progenies have been raised and examined.
Simple monofactorial segregations have been observed for branching pattern,
photoperiod sensitivity and flower colour. Seed size and seed coat colour
segregations are more complex and require much more detailed study.
Certainly there are no grounds to suppose that there is any kind of fertility
barrier between primitive and cultivated forms. Flower and seed morphology
differs most widely between Ph. coccineus cultivars and the presumed primitive
ancestral form Ph. formosus. The stigma of Ph. coccineus is lateral, elongate
and outwardly directed; in Ph. formosus it is capitate and terminal. The seeds
are nearly circular in outline, the hilum a broad oval in Ph. formosus, whereas
Ph. coccineus seeds are more kidney-shaped and the hilum is elongate. In the
three other species there is very close correspondence in flower and pod
morphology between primitive and cultivated forms. Although de Candolle
more than a century and a quarter ago suggested that Ph. formosus was
ancestral to Ph. coccineus, it is possible that an undescribed form may yet
exist which is actually closer to the ancestral type.



      Conclusion

In conclusion it can be said that the response of New World Phaseolus species
does provide a good illustration of Vavilov’s principle of homologous varia¬
tion. In three of the four species, dwarf determinate forms occur and in two
of them it is possible to demonstrate that an homologous locus is probably
involved. In F2 progeny from an interspecific hybrid Ph. vulgaris (dwarf
determinate) x Ph. coccineus (dwarf determinate) no segregation for branch¬
ing habit was observed. It is not possible to cross either of these species with
Ph. lunatus and establish genetic homology directly, but morphologically the
                                   Evolution of American Phaseolus beans       461

result is the same and a homologous locus in all probability does control
branching habit in the three species.
   The suppression of lateral branching in domesticated climbers accom¬
panied by an increase in size of leaf and stem has followed a similar pattern in
Ph. vulgaris, Ph. coccineus and Ph. lunatus although the most perfect pyra¬
midal form is developed in Ph. vulgaris. In physiological terms the cultivated
types show more pronounced apical dominance. The dwarf indeterminate
growth form is subject to environmental modification. Ph. vulgaris varieties
and cultivated Ph. acutifolius which develop this habit of growth out of doors
may under greenhouse conditions behave as indeterminate climbers. It is
possible that this change in form is controlled by the production of a growth
substance, most probably a gibberellin, which is suppressed under conditions
of high incident ultraviolet light.
   Some question might also be raised on the question of determinate vs.
indeterminate growth habits. The typical determinate dwarf cultivated bean
bears its terminal inflorescence after not more than seven or eight nodes have
been produced on the mam axis. In both Ph. vulgaris and Ph. coccineus
climbing forms occur in which growth in length of the main axis is terminated
by an inflorescence after twenty or even more nodes have been produced.
This suggests that growth habit may be controlled by genes affecting in the
first place internode length and secondly node number.
   A general response in all beans to domestication has been increased seed
size. Segregation data of F2 progeny studied so far indicate that this is
probably polyfactorial. Detailed biometrical study of this important character
is most certainly needed.
   There is little doubt that in domestication Ph. vulgaris has proven to be the
most versatile. It has produced the greatest range of variants, in growth
habit, seed shape, seed-coat colour and pod texture. The environmental
range is however restricted to warm and cool temperate climates and herein
lies the greatest potential for future improvement. A versatile legume such as
Ph. vulgaris could be exploited very intensively in the tropics if it could be
grown there satisfactorily. There is the possibility that the production of
amphidiploids between Ph. vulgaris and Ph. acutifolius might be a step in this
direction, if they possessed the heat tolerance of Ph. acutifolius without serious
loss of the pod and seed quality of Ph. vulgaris.
   Kaplan17 has pointed out that in recent historic times the cultivation of Ph.
acutifolius has contracted to a marked degree in Mexico and it seems quite
likely that this species will disappear from cultivation in a relatively short
while. The possibility of making use of it in hybridization should however be
 borne in mind. There seems to be no immediate danger of the remaining two
 species going out of cultivation, largely because these species extend beyond
 the effective range of Ph. vulgaris cultivation, Ph. coccineus into cooler climatic
 zones and Ph. lunatus into tropical regions.
   We are still unable to pinpoint any single decisive factor which has
462    Part IV Plants     smartt


established Ph. vulgaris in its pre-eminent position among Phaseolus beans
but the following factors are probably the most important.

1 an inherent capacity to respond to selection
2 the heavy selection pressures applied
3 an early wide dispersion and selection over a range of temperature environ¬
  ments in pre-Columbian times favouring a very rapid spread in post-
  Columbian times.
  The factor which has limited the spread of Ph. vulgaris has of course
preserved the range of four species now in cultivation. There is no doubt
that Gause’s law can be applied to crop plant species as well as those in the
wild. Just as two very similar species cannot coexist indefinitely in the same
natural habitat and exploit it in exactly the same way so two very similar crop
plants will not persist indefinitely in cultivation under any given set of
environmental conditions; one or other will fall by the wayside.



      Notes
        1 Simmonds, N. W. (1962). The Evolution of the Bananas. London.
       2 Hutchinson, J. B., Silow, R. A. and Stephens, S. G. (1947). The Evolution
           of Gossypium. Oxford.
       3 Darlington, C. D. (1956). Chromosome Botany and the Origins of Cultivated
          Plants. London; Hutchinson, Sir J. (ed.) (1965). Essays on Crop Plant
          Evolution. Cambridge; Schwanitz, F. (1966). The Origin of Cultivated
          Plants. Harvard.
       4 Rendle, A. B. (1925). The Classification of Flowering Plants, 2. Cambridge.
       5 Mackie, W. W. (1943). Origin, dispersal and variability of Phaseolus
          lunatus, Hilgardia, 15, pp. 1-29.
       6 Bentham, G. (1862). Genera Plantarum, 1. Hookerian Herbarium, Kew.
       7 Hutchinson, J. (1964). The Genera of Flowering Plants, 1. Oxford.
       8 Ohwi, J. (1953). Flora of Japan. (Japanese.) (Eng. trans. 1965.) Smith¬
          sonian Inst., Washington.
       9 de Candolle, A. P. (1825). Prodromus, 2. Paris.
      10 de Candolle, A. P. (1825). ibid.; Taubert, P. (1891), in Engler, A. and
          Prantl, K. Die Natiirlichen Pflanzen familien, 3. Leipzig; Piper, C. V.
          (1926). American genera of Phaseolineae, Contributions, U.S. National
          Herbarium, 22, p. 9.
      11 Kaplan, L. (1965). Archaeology and domestication in American Phaseolus
          beans, Econ. Bot., 19. pp. 356-68.
      12 See also Allard, R. W. (1953). Inheritance of morphological characters in
          lima beans, Hilgardia, 22, pp. 283-9.
      13 Kaplan, L. (1965). ibid.
      14 Ojehomon, O. O. (1966). The development of flower primordia of
          Phaseolus vulgaris (L.) Savi, Ann. Bot., 30, pp. 487-92.
      15 Kaplan, L. (1965). ibid.
      16 Rathjen, A. (1965). Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge.
      17 Kaplan, L. (1965). ibid.
      W. R. STANTON

    Some domesticated lower plants in South-east Asian
food technology


  The philosophy underlying the subject of the domestication of lower plants
  has come under close scrutiny as part of the rapid expansion of research in
  recent years into various novel methods of satisfying man’s requirement for
  food, that is, in the face of a rapidly increasing world population.
     I have used, in the title to this paper the broad taxon “lower plants” to
 distinguish this process of plant evolution under the influence of man from
•that of the previous speakers who have all been dealing with higher plants,
 that is Angiosperms. The so-called lower plants comprise a very wide variety
 of life forms most conveniently distinguished from the higher plants by their
 reproductive system, but they may be considered from the point of view of
 the present discussion as plant forms which do not normally occupy the environ¬
 ments provided by agriculture, except to interfere with the normal course of
 agriculture by causing diseases of higher plants, deterioration and spoilage,
 and superficially interfering with man’s agricultural efforts.
    However, on closer inspection of agricultural evolution in its broadest sense,
 including fertility improvement, food harvesting, storage, and processing
 (and in this context I include both the harvest of animals as well as the
 gathering of plant parts), it is realized that a great diversity of autotrophic,
 heterotrophic and parasitic plant forms associated with the main economic
species have undergone concomitant changes. As with higher plant breeding,
it is only within very recent times that a positive breeding approach has been
directed towards the secondary organisms involved in natural-product
production and utilization.
    The term “plant” is of great antiquity as applied to the micro-organisms of
Western food technologies. One has only to think of such terms as “vinegar
plant” and “ginger-beer plant”; mushrooms and seaweeds used for food have
also been described in this way. Otherwise, the lay classification made the
distinction between “moulds”, “slimes”, and “ferments”, the recognition of
the role of lower-plants in the last category being of relatively recent origin.
    The constructive role of micro-organisms under domestication is almost as
diverse as that of the higher plants of agriculture. This has not been solely a
464   Part IV Plants    STANTON


consequence of higher plant and animal domestication. Lower plants have
opened up new possibilities in terms of food production and recovery,
flavour improvement, toxic component removal, utilization of waste for food,
supply of essential secondary food constituents, and such activities as binding
by their thread-like structures, or disintegration from the activity of their
extra-cellular enzymes as the need arose. Extra cellular enzyme processes are
familiar in the technology of retting and the saccharification of starches.
   A major part of the work of the microbiology department at the Tropical
Products Institute is concerned with the diversity of constructive roles of
micro-organisms as will be seen from Fig. 1.
   I have confined my discussion to particular aspects of South-east Asian
food technology for reasons which I will explain in a moment.
   Even if one excludes the technologies of the manufacture of cheese, bread,
beers, wine, vinegar and so on, lower plant domestication is not exclusively a
tropical phenomenon. For instance, seaweeds are of very ancient usage in
Welsh (lava-bread)1 and Norwegian food technology; lactic acid fermentations
are important in the fermentation of temperate zone vegetables, although they
assume a greater importance in the tropics2.
   However, in a tropical and sub-tropical environment the food preservation
methods of chilling, salting, and drying are impossible or less freely available.
Even after treatment of the harvest by the second two methods, infection
of the products with micro-organisms is likely to occur.
   It is this interaction, that is “the presence of high salt concentration plus
partial dehydration”, which is employed in the characteristic fermented fish
sauces and pastes of South-east Asia. These products are daily items of diet
and contribute as much as one third of the daily protein requirement, other
than rice, to the diet. For this reason I have chosen a tropical region with a
long history of food technology, and that is, an area with “millennia of history
of fungi, food and fermentation” to quote the title of Hesseltine’s classical
review of the subject3.
   In Indonesia, at the heart of the region, fermented cakes of soya beans and
groundnut provide about one-third of the total crude protein requirement of
the population and these fermentation processes have been particularly
studied in our laboratory because they can be applied to fermenting low-
protein agricultural products to synthesize microbial protein in situ with
added mineral nitrogen and other salts4.
   Mushrooms, although a very common constituent of the South-east Asian
diets, contribute a small proportion of the protein, and recent studies of the
Basidiomycetes have shown that it would not be possible to meet the whole of
the human protein requirement from the culture of this type of organism
even by modern industrial methods. Nevertheless, the Dutch have recently
considered it worthwhile to investigate the growing of the classical mush¬
room of South-east Asia, the paddy-straw mushroom (Volvaria species)5 as
part of the diversification of their industrialized food economy. The Basidio-
                  C “O   <D
                  £ o _c
                  ° o tr
                  U LL O




;E
•c
<
T3
0)Q>
CO


 CO
O)
TO>
<D

            CD
            c

            <DO
            O



 CO

 E
 0)
 +->
CO

 w)
 0)
x>
,D



 O
 O
cc


 oD
*D
  O
 (T3
D
 CD
2                    o c ,9>




       03
       .o
       03
       •w
       03
       Q
466     Pan IV       Plants    stanton


mycetes, of which Volvaria is a member are, however, a particularly interesting
 group of fungi in that they are the most important group which can
 exploit cellulose as their carbon source of growth. The other main method
 of utilizing cellulose has been via the ruminant, but the organisms in the
rumen require an extremely specialized environment which it is difficult to
simulate even under the most advanced laboratory conditions.
   The paddy-straw mushroom can be regarded as a truly “domesticated”
plant, although it appeared originally as a growth on the threshing and milling
trash of the rice mill. Attempts have been made in recent years to select this
organism and improve the growing conditions6. As always happens with
increased domesticity it seems that troubles are beginning to arise from a new
series of pathogens—fungi, bacteria and viruses. These diseases are already
the common experience of the mushroom growers of the temperate zones.
   In following the path of domestication of higher plants, we are able to
observe the interaction and the response of the plant to methods of harvesting,
selection for increased size of the useful part, selection for palatability, yield,
etc. It is also possible to trace the spread of lower domesticated plants along
with the spread of the appropriate human culture.
   For the food technologies and the micro-organisms associated with them,
however, the documentation and research is less complete than for the higher
plant and animals. The organisms, examples of which I have already men¬
tioned and which I have classified in Table i, are truly domesticated and differ
from their wild relatives in a number of respects. The changes which have
occurred must be observed in controlled culture studies, for which one can

Algae                  Fungi                       Yeasts              Bacteria

Marine                 Basidiomycetes              Saccharomyces sp.   Acetobacterl'a’b'>
 Chondrus crispus      e.g. Volvaria^’6>           S. cerevisiae^'h)   Bacillus subtilista'b'>
 Porphyra sp. <“>           Amanita sp.            S’. rouxiila’b'>    Lactobacillus(0’6)
 Others*e>                  Hallucinogenic fungi                       Corynebacterium
                            Various “wood”         Hansenula sp.<">    fish sauce organisms
Lacustrine                    fungi<“>
  Spirulina sp.        Others*1*)
  Chlorella sp.<c>          Aspergillus^’b>
                            Monascus^a)
                            MoniliaW
                            Mucor
                            Penicillium
                            Rhizopus(-a'b'>
                            Thamnidium


(a) Indigenous to South-east Asian food technology.
(b) Known to have undergone extensive selection.
(c) Japan mainly.
(4) See also Hesseltine, C. W., Wang, Hwa, L. and Smith, M. (1967). Traditional fermented
    foods, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 9 (3), pp. 275-88.
(e) Subba Rao, G. N. (1965). Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council Regional Studies. No. 2. Use of
    seaweeds directly as human food, Bankok; F.A.O. Regional Office for Asia and the Far
    East, p. 32.

Table 1 Examples of “cultivated” micro-organisms.
                       Lower plants in South-east Asian food technology     467

use the equivalent of the Clausen transplant-experiment technique7, studies
of growth rate, interaction with substrate, biochemical pathways, and the
biochemistry and organoleptic character of the end products. Taste is still an
important aid to the selection of the organisms involved in the fermentation
in spite of all the refinements of analytical chemistry.
   The end-product of the micro-organic culture consists of the micro¬
organism mass itself such as the sporophores of Basidiomycetous fungi, and
the algae8, including seaweed. Even bacteria such as the Acetobacter sp. are
stimulated to form a jelly-like mass on fruit juice and coconut water in a
Philippine fermentation process to produce Nata. Alternatively, a mixture of
the original material with mycelium threads of fungi such as Rhizopus, Mucor
and other species may be produced9, or a more complex fermentation may
occur such as is used in the manufacture of miso, a fermented soya bean paste
of Japan10, in which a number of organisms have taken part at different stages.
This particular paste is of interest in that three-quarters of the households in
Japan use this fermented product as a main soup component daily, according
to a recent survey report. The Japanese products represent a northward and
eastward migration of the “sho” processes (a general term in Japan for the
high salt fermentations). Today these fermentations are carried out under
highly industrialized conditions, the organisms being given the benefit of
highly specialized environments, and the domestication in consequence has
proceeded here further than it has elsewhere in the region. Further, due to the
extensive Japanese investigations of these industrialized organisms and their
associated production methods, more is known about the variation in charac¬
ter between different strains in Japan than in other parts of the region.
Japanese, American, Indonesian and our own study of the organisms used in
the village-factory and domestic economies in the south and east of the
region show that these food micro-organisms, which are conserved from one
process batch to the next, differ considerably in many characters from their
wild counterparts.
   The types of variation which we found in different isolates in response to
different substrates and controlled conditions are shown in Table 2.
   I feel that we are on the verge of a large development in domestication of
these organisms, in order to make a better use of the limited food resources of
the Tropical World, and we shall require all the modern techniques of
agronomy such as the statistical methods of response surfaces to achieve
optimum growing conditions, and plant breeding which has great possibilities
with micro-organisms, in order to achieve optimum results. We have however
the advantage with the cultivation of these lower plants that we can control
with relative ease the environment in which they are grown, and we can
employ specialized environments which will protect them in part from harm¬
ful elements of the rest of the biota, that is, from the effects of unwanted
micro-organisms such as those which produce mycotoxins and which are the
analogues of weeds in higher plant agriculture.
468    Part IV Plants        STANTON

General genetic and cytological stability: probably increases (true of brewing yeasts).
Growing rate: increased in the selected substrate, but decreased in comparison with “wild
  types” on the general range of substrates. Probable loss of capacity to overcome naturally
  occurring growth inhibitors.
Environmental adaptability: growth of cultivated strain inferior to wild type outside the range
  of conditions normally provided for the fermentation, e.g. temperature, humidity, salinity,
  oxygen, tension, nutrient concentration.
Reproductive capacity: selection for early and heavy sporulation under the processing condi¬
  tions employed.
Food acceptability: improved palatability and acceptability of end-product (selection against
  unacceptable metabolites).
Increased tolerance: to growth inhibiting factors occurring in the cultivation process, e.g.
  metal ions (Cu++, Zn++), specific glycosides, N03, urea, organic acids, phenolic compounds.
Contrived growth: in presence of its own metabolites; the loss of enzyme feed-back
  inhibitions.
Advanced industrial processes: strains with highly selected segments of biosynthetic pathways
  with removal of feed-back inhibitions.

Table 2     Examples of known and postulated changes in fungi due to selection
      under cultivation.


  Micro-organism cultures may be regarded as components of a two stage
phytosynthetic process and, apart from the disadvantage of an obligatory
requirement of non-solar energy, they have many advantages over higher
plant cultures in features such as short cultivation time, low demand on land
and fresh water (sea-water and saline water can be used) and simplicity of
mutual adjustment of organism to environment with consequent precise
control over the character of the synthetic product. Analysis of the classical
process impresses one with the degree of understanding which early tech¬
nologies achieved in harnessing the ferments.
   As with higher plants, it is pertinent to advance domestication initially
with the recognized food species of micro-organisms, though because we can
now create chemically and physically controlled environments not available
to earlier food technologists, we may be able to cultivate previously un¬
tamable species.



       Notes

        1 Duddington, C. L. (1967). Seaweeds and Other Algae. London, p. 207;
          Glabe, E. F., Goldman, P. F. and Anderson, P. W. (1957). How Irish
          moss extractive improves protein-content foods, Fd. Engng., 29 (1), pp.
          65-7j Larsen, B. A. and Hawkins, W. W. (1961). Nutritional value as
          protein of some of the nitrogenous constituents of Chondrus crispus and
          Laminaris digitata,J. Sci. Fd. Agric., 12, pp. 523-9; De Guerin, B. C.
          (1946). Carrageen in the Channel Isles, Fd. Mf., 21, pp. 95-8; Sieburth,
          J. McN. and Jensen, A. (1967). Effect of processing on the microflora
          of Norwegian seaweed meal with observations on Sporondonema minutum
          (Hpye), Frank and Hess, Appl. Microbiol., 15 (4), pp. 830-8.
        2 Etchells, J. L., Jones, I. D. and Lewis, W. M. (1947). Bacteriological
          changes during the fermentation of certain brind and salted vegetables,
          U.S.D.A. Technical Bull., 947, Oct. 1947.
                  Lower plants in South-east Asian food technology       469

 3 Hesseltine, C. W. (1965). A Millennium of fungi, food and fermenta¬
   tion, Mycologia, 57, pp. 149-97; Hesseltine, C. W., Wang, H. L. and
   Smith, M. (1967). Traditional Fermented Foods, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 9
   (3)» PP- 275-88.
 4 Annual Rep. Tropical Products Inst. (1967). H.M.S.O., London, p. 49.
 5 Chang, S. T. (1965). Cultivation of the straw mushroom in S.E. China,
   World Crops, 17 (3), pp. 47-9.
 6 Madic, V. R. and Roldan, E. F. (1965). A preliminary test on the effect on
   mushroom production of straws rendered sterile with fumigant dowfume
   MC-Z, AranetaJ. Agric., 12, pp. 233-8.
 7 Clausen, J., Keck, D. D., Hiesey, W. M. (1939). The concept of species
   based on experiments, Amer. J. Bot., 26 (2), pp. 103-6.
 8 Subba Rao, G. N. (1965). Use of seaweed directly as human food,Indo-
   Pacific Fisheries Council Regional Studies, 2, F.A.O. Regional Office for
   Asia and the Far East, Bangkok, p. 32.
 9 Hesseltine, C. W. et al. (1964). Tempeh: Nutritive value in relation to
   processing, Cereal Chem., 41 (3), pp. 173-81.
10 Standal, B. R. (1963). Nutritional value of proteins of oriental soyabeans’
   products, J. Nutr., 81 (3), p. 279 and p. 285.
       Section 2: Animals




       M. S. DROWER

       The domestication of the horse


The four main species of the genus Equus appear to have been distributed
over the forests and plains of the Old World during the Pleistocene period in
separate geographical zones: the onagers or half-asses (hemiones) in Hither
Asia (Arabia, Persia and India), the asses in northern and north-east Africa,
the zebras in the south and east of Africa and the caballine horses in Europe
and in Central Asia north of the great mountain ranges. All these species are
capable of producing hybrids, and all but the zebras have been domesticated
by man1.
   Of the species of Equus caballus, three wild races, all rather small, have
survived until fairly recently. These are Przewalski’s horse, a native of
Mongolia, of which a few specimens only are preserved in zoological gardens;
the tarpan, which became extinct in the middle of the nineteenth century
a.d. ; and the forest wild horse, which survived in Poland until the eighteenth
century. Whether the wild horses depicted in cave-paintings as the quarry of
hunters were all of one sub-species, or of several different strains, is in dis¬
pute; the existence of a much larger horse in palaeolithic times has been
postulated2. It appears at any rate certain that neither palaeolithic nor meso¬
lithic man domesticated the horse.



      First domestication
There is little evidence, written or archaeological, for the presence of the
domesticated horse in the Middle East until a little before 2000 b.c. Domesti¬
cation, necessarily a gradual process, must have been achieved earlier and
elsewhere. The distribution of the wild species suggests that horses were first
472   Part IV Animals     drower


tamed on the grass steppe-lands to the north, in the Ukraine or somewhere
further east, between Turkestan and China. The tamers are likely to have
been nomadic herdsmen to whom rapid mobility would have given many
advantages. It is however difficult to establish evidence for the early domesti¬
cation of the horse, since precise indications of morphological change, such
as are present in the skeletons of cattle and sheep3, are absent from the bones
of Equidae4. Bones of horses occur at all levels of the Tripolye culture of the
Ukraine, but become numerous only in the later phases; the sharp increase in
numbers in other sites contemporaneous with Tripolye B has been thought
to be evidence for domestication about 2700 or 2800 b.c.5 In the so-called
Timber Grave culture of the Volga region, ceremonial horse burials occur,
together with sacrifices of cattle, in a context of the middle of the second
millennium6.
   One or two isolated examples of bones formerly identified as E. caballus,
found in Persia in an early context at Sialk and Anau, are now generally
considered to be onagers7, and this is probably also true of the remains
found in Beersheba and dated to the fourth millennium b.c.8, though the
possibility cannot be ruled out that this was an early breed of wild horse
which later died out. Horses are not however depicted in prehistoric rock-
drawings in Palestine or Egypt9. The bone tablet from Susa which appears to
be a tally of domesticated equids with short bristle-manes must depict
onagers10.
   The first literary mention of the horse (in Sumerian ANSE KUR.RA)
occurs in a text of the Third Dynasty of Ur, c. 2100 b.c., in which the animal
is described as “of the (caravan) route” (i.e. not wild), and “with flowing
tail”; the latter epithet distinguishes it from the onager and assu. The word
ANSE.KUR means “foreign ass” or “ass of the mountains”; it is found in its
literal meaning in the Sumerian story of “Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta”,
in which asses of the mountain are used as beasts of burden (a purpose for
which the horse was not employed)12. Though horses are not mentioned in
the Code of Hammurabi and cannot therefore have been a domestic animal
frequently owned and used by Babylonians of the early eighteenth century
B.c., they make their appearance at about that time as costly and much-
desired objects of trade between the Amorite princes, Hammurabi’s near
contemporaries, whose correspondence is preserved in the Mari letters.
Carchemish on the Euphrates was one of the centres of distribution and
Kharsamma in Cappadocia was a source of supply13. Horses are several times
mentioned in the texts from Kanesh (modem Kiiltepe, near Kayseri) where
the form used is the Akkadian sisu, a word of undoubtedly Indo-European
origin (>aswas, ekwos)14, and although they do not receive mention in the
tablets from Alalakh of the eighteenth century b.c., they were known at the
same time in Brak and Chagar Bazar, on the river Khabut, where there are
models of equids, evidently horses, with painted or modelled bridles, and the
tablets mention “yokes” of horses: the quantities of fodder allowed for a yoke
                                            The domestication of the horse   473

show that two, or three (two and a spare), horses are meant15. For their role
was not to replace the ass as a pack animal, but to draw, yoked in pairs, the
light biga with spoked wheels which was now revolutionizing warfare.



      The horse and chariot of the Bronze Age

This mobile vehicle16, in build quite unlike the cumbersome solid-wheeled
Sumerian chariot drawn by onagers which it superseded17, is everywhere in
the Near East associated with the newcomers—Kassites, Hittites, Hurrians—
who during the early years of the second millennium b.c. were establishing
their rule over the kingdoms of Western Asia. Its use must have given tactical
superiority to the newcomers. In particular it is associated with the Indo-
Aryan aristocracies among the Hurrian and Kassites. Texts pertaining to the
art of horse-breeding use technical terms akin to Sanskrit, and the chivalry of
Mitanni and the Hurrian-dominated city-states of Syria and Palestine were
known by the Indo-Iranian name maryannu18. It may therefore be suggested
that mounted Aryans brought the horse south of the Caucasus, and that in
some well-wooded19 but not too rugged terrain, a new and more mobile form
of chariot was devised, perhaps by the Hurrians of the region who already
knew and used the heavier onager or ass-drawn vehicle20.
   The new technique spread rapidly: by the sixteenth century horses and
chariots were known and used in Greece and Egypt. The first European
horse is that depicted in the fifth shaft-grave at Mycenae, and the earliest
representations of horses in Egypt appear at the beginning of the eighteenth
dynasty, about 1570; they are mentioned in texts referring to the war of
liberation from the Hyksos a decade or so before, and the single horse whose
skeleton was found in the debris of the destroyed Middle Kingdom fortress
at Buhen21 may have been buried as early as the seventeenth century b.c.
Remains of horses have been found in India in contexts of the sixteenth
century and the horse and chariot reached China at least by 1300 B.C.22
   Technical treatises which have survived among the cuneiform tablets of the
Late Bronze Age show that in Anatolia23, North Syria24 and Mesopotamia25
the breeding, training and veterinary care of horses was well understood:
there are directions for exercising and grooming horses, stressing the im¬
portance of careful diet, and remedies for sick animals. At Ugarit what
appeared to be an indoor riding school26 was found. When sent from one
country to another, the animals needed to be acclimatized. In a letter to the
King of Babylonia27, a Hittite king asks for fresh supplies of horses, since
those which the former Kassite king had sent have gone lame: “In Hatti-land
the cold is severe, and an old horse does not last long. So send me, my brother,
young stallions!” Horses are listed at Alalakh and Nuzi according to sex, age
and colour; in Nuzi28, Hurrian words are used for the various colours, and in
the Kassite texts29 stallions are given names such as “Foxy”, “Starry”,
474   Fart IV Animals      drower

 “White”, “Piebald”. The name of the sire is often added (X., son of Y.),
 showing that pedigrees were remembered and perhaps stud-books kept.
 White horses were especially prized, in the Ancient Near East as among the
 Persians, Romans and Germans of a later age30; they were destined to draw
the chariots of kings and of gods and in Assyria were accorded divine
honours31.
   Ownership of horses and a chariot was a matter of rank and privilege. Only
kings and nobility are shown in the lightest type of vehicle, the mono¬
place chariot in which extraordinary skill and balance were needed. Looping
the reins round their waist, they let fly their arrows at a gallop after fleeing
targets, whether enemy soldiers or wild game. Ramesses III in the later New
Kingdom is shown in an open-fronted chariot with one foot on the chariot
pole, but this was unprecedented virtuosity (PI. ill). The breed was small, in
general not exceeding the dimensions of a pony: skeletal remains, and the
dimensions of the stables at Ugarit32, confirm the reliability of the artists in
this respect. It has often been remarked that horses are seldom shown being
ridden, and that in such representations (Fig i), the riders appear to be




Fig i Riding groom, from the tomb of Horemheb at Memphis, c. 1345 b.c.
      (after Aldred, C. (1951). New Kingdom Art in Ancient Egypt during the 18th
      dynasty B.C. London. Fig. 141.)


grooms or stable lads33. The explanation that they were too small to bear full-
grown men cannot be correct, for donkeys were ridden; the reason may he
rather in the difficulty an inexperienced bareback rider without stirrups
would have in keeping his balance, and his dignity, on a short-striding animal
at the trot31. Nevertheless Astarte, the Syrian goddess who protected
charioteers, is herself shown riding bareback35, and it may be suspected that
there were larger breeds which were more suitable for riding. The Buhen
horse was larger than a pony, and a horse found buried at Osmankayasi near
Boghazkoi30 was about fourteen and a half hands (150 cm.), the size of a
modern Arab, and able no doubt to pull the heavier, three-manned chariot of
the Hittites. For horses must have been bred for size as the weight of the
chariot increased. The armour-plating of chariots and horses and of their
                                           The domestication of the horse   475


riders, was no doubt made necessary by the spread of penetrating weapons
such as the composite bow; the sariam frequently mentioned in the Nuzi
texts (the word is probably Indo-Iranian) appears to have been a leather
jerkin or cover sewn with metal scales37.

       The Iron Age

By 1000 b.c. new and larger breeds of horse were making their appearance
and superior harness had evolved. A second wave of Indo-European immigra¬
tion brought horse riders to the Iranian highlands. To Azerbaijan and to
Gilan and Mazanderan on the well-watered southern shore of the Caspian
Sea came the Mannaeans and the Medes, and Iran soon became the land of
“fine horses and fine men”. Horses figure largely in the animal style of
Luristan and bronze cheek-pieces, horse-bits and other harness elements are
the most common objects found38. Pottery models show saddles. The horses
the newcomers rode were relatively big: horse-bones from Hasanlu in
Azerbaijan (Early Iron Age) examined by Bokonyi were those of animals
about 140 cm. in height39 and those found in early Scythian graves at Szentes-
Vekerzug in Hungary studied by him were of a similar size40. Zamua and the
Mannai territories south of Lake Urmia were sources whence the Assyrians
obtained fresh supplies of horses, and from the ninth century onwards
mounted cavalry formed an essential part of the Assyrian fighting force. At
the same time, according to the palace reliefs, the chariot was getting heavier
and larger; so, too, were the horses that drew it (Fig. 2).




Fig 2a War chariot: relief from the palace of Ashur-nasir-pal, ninth
     century b.c.
     (after Layard, A. H. (1849). Nineveh and its Remains, 2. London, p. 350).


   According to Hilzheimer41 several breeds of horse are represented in these
reliefs, but he probably puts too much reliance on the accuracy of the
draughtsman; similarly, Ghirshman’s attempt to deduce from the painted
pottery horses from Susa and Makou the existence of two distinct breeds42 is
unwarranted. There is however good evidence for the coexistence of two
476   Part IV Animals    drower




Fig 2b Ashur-bani-pal’s state chariot, seventh century b.c.
     (after Layard, A. H. (1849). Nineveh audits Remains, 2. London, p. 137).

races of horse in the remarkably-preserved burials of the fifth century b.c. at
Pazyryk43: in each kurgan a number of short-headed ponies were found,
which Professor Vitt considered to have been descended from a wild
Mongolian stock of Przewalski descent, and also at least one thoroughbred
horse of greater stature (over 140 cm.); these were all geldings and had been
fed on corn and carefully tended, and they wore fine trappings. It is suggested
that the larger animals, which were similar in size and build to those from
Szentes, mentioned above44, may be descended from tarpan stock. Antonius
also classes Scythian horses as descendants of tarpans, basing his theory
largely on the horses depicted on the Chertomlyk vase45.
   Archaeology and the testimony of Herodotus (Bk. VII) have told us much
about the Scythians, and it is in this remarkable people that the fullest
development of a pastoral economy in which the horse played a leading part
may be pictured. They rode and shot with skill; they ate salted horse flesh
and drank fermented mare’s milk. In the barrows of South Russia the whole¬
sale sacrifice of horses described by Herodotus can be vividly reconstructed46.
It may be that the way of life of these nomads reflects the original symbiosis
of man and horse, developed on the steppe-lands perhaps two thousand years
earlier.



      The Western horse

It is not possible to discuss here the vexed question of the horses depicted in
the rock-engravings of North Africa, nor is the present writer competent to
do so. The date of the drawings, of which some thousands survive, has been
much discussed and there have been various attempts to classify them.
Henri Lhote in his studies of the Tassili group47 distinguishes a “che valine
period” in which horses are shown in pairs drawing a light-wheeled chariot,
in the attitude of the “flying gallop”; in these he sees similarities with
                                              The domestication of the horse   477


Mycenaean art and he suggests that the Sea Peoples, after the failure of their
attacks on Egypt, moved westwards with their Libyan allies and penetrated
the Fezzan, bringing with them the horse and chariot. Another theory would
associate the Tassili charioteers with the Garamantes and other tribes known
to the Romans. Neither takes account of the theory, discussed by Zeuner48,
that there may have been a separate western centre of domestication in Spain
or North Africa which gave rise to the North African “barb” or Barbary
horse. Here too there seems to be much scope for further enquiry. Whatever
the truth may be, it seems certain that the idea of the domestication of the
horse, and of harnessing it to a wheeled vehicle, must have reached the
Western Mediterranean from the Levant.


      Notes
       1 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
       2 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. p. 306.
       3 See Bokonyi, S. and Grigson, C., this volume, pp. 219-46 and 277-306.
       4 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. p. 316.
       5 Dr. S. Bokonyi’s dating (in discussion).
       6 Clark, G. and Piggott, S. (1967). Prehistoric Societies. London, p. 275.
       7 See Noble, D. S., this volume, pp. 485-8.
       8 Anati, E. (1963). Palestine before the Hebrews. London, p. 241.
       9 Anati, E. (1963). op. cit. p. 208; Winkler, H. (1938-9). Rock Drawings of
         Southern Upper Egypt. E.E.S. Archaeological Survey.
      10 Amiet, P. (1966). Elam. Anvers-sur-Oise. p. 97.                 v
      11 Falkenstein, A. (1952). Sumerische religiose Texte 2: Ein Sulgi-Lied,
         Z. Assyriologie, 16, pp. 64 ff.
      12 Salonen, A. (1956). Hippologica Accadica, Annales Academiae Scientiarum
         Eennicae. Sarja. Ser. B. Nide. 100. Helsinki, p. 19.
      13 Salonen, A. (1956). op. cit. p. 23; Dossin, R. (1938). Aplahanda, Roi de
         Carkemis, Rev. d’Assyriol., 35, p. 120.
      14 Salonen, A. (1956). op. cit. p. 21.
      15 Gadd, C. J. (1940). Tablets from Chagar Bazar and Tell Brak, Iraq, 7,
         pp. 22 ff.
      16 Yadin, Y. (1963). The Art of Warfare in Biblical Lands. London, pp. 86 ff.
      17 See Noble, D. S., this volume, ibid.
      18 O’Callaghan, R. T. (1948). Aram Naharaim, Analecta Orientalia, 26, pp.
         64 ff.
      19 The chariot preserved in Florence is built of oak and elm and has tyres
         of birch-bark ... all northern woods.
      20 Crossland, R. A. (1967). Immigrants from the North, C.A.H.IP, Cam¬
         bridge, ch. 27.
      21 Emery, W. B. (i960). A preliminary report on the excavations of the
         Egypt Exploration Society at Buhen, 1958-9, Kush, 8, pp. 7 ff.
      22 Dewall, M. von. (1964). Pferd und Wagen im friihen China, Saarbriicker
         Beitrage zur Altertumskunde, I, pp. 109 ff.
      23 Kammenhuber, A. (1961). Hippologia Hethitica. Wiesbaden.
      24 Virolleaud, Ch. (1934). Fragments d’un traite phenicien de therapeutique
         hippologique, Syria, 15, pp. 75 ff.
      25 Ebeling, E. (1951). Bruchstucke einer mittelassyrischen Vorschriftensam-
         lung fur die Akklimatisation und Trainierung von Wagenpferden,
          Deutsche Akad. d. Wiss., Inst.f. Orientforschung, 7.
478    Part IV Animals      drower

       26 Schaeffer, C. F. A. (1938). Les fouilles de Ras Shamra-Ugarit: neuvieme
           campagne (printemps 1937), Syria, 19, p. 314.
       27 See Salonen, A. (1956). op. cit. p. 28 for references.
       28 Pfeiffer, R. and Speiser, E. A. (1936). One hundred new selected Nuzi
           texts, Ann. Am. Sch. Or. Research, 16.
      29 Balkan, K. (1954). Kassitenstudien I, Die Sprache der Kassiten, Amer. Or.
           Series, 37, pp. 11-40 and pp. 127 f.
       30 Herodotus, 7, 40 and 7, 113; Livy, 5, 28, 5; Tacitus, Germania, 10, etc.
       31 Weidner, E. A. (1952). Weisse Pferde im alten Orient, Bibliotheca
           Orientalis, 9 (5-6), pp. 157 ff.
      32 Schaeffer, C. F. A. (1949). Ugaritica, 2 (Mission de Ras Shamra, 5).
          Paris, p. 13.
      33 Schulman, A. R. (1957). Egyptian Representations of Horsemen and
          Riding in the New Kingdom, J. of Near Eastern Studies, 16, pp. 263 ff.
      34 I have to thank Mr. H. J. Case for this explanation; he says further “to
          keep his balance he instinctively tries to close his calves and heels round
          the belly. This excites the animal and makes him trot faster; and places
          the rider (with his pelvis tilted forward) in a highly uncomfortable position
          and one in which he has little control, should the pony suddenly break
          into a fast canter or gallop. Chariot-horses were equally spectacular and
          less liable to lapses of dignity.”
      35 Leclant, A. (i960). Astarte a cheval d’apres les representations egyptiennes,
          Syria, 37, pp. 1 fit.
      36 Bittel, K., Heere, W. and Otten, H. (1958). Die hethitischen Grabfunde
          von Osmankayasi. Bogazkoy-Hattusa, 2. pp. 60-4.
      37 Oppenheim, A. L. (1950). Review of Figulla, H. H. (1949). Business Docu¬
          ments of the New Babylonian Period. London, J. Cuneiform Soc., 4,
          pp. 191 ff.
      38 Porada, E. (1965). Ancient Iran. London, pp. 75 ff. and pp. 234 ff.
      39 In discussion.
      40 Bokonyi, S. (1954). Les chevaux scythiques de Szentes-Vekerzug 2. Les
          fouilles de 1952-3, Acta Arch. Hung., 4.
      41 Hilzheimer, M. (1955). The evolution of the domestic horse. Antiquity,
          9, pp. 133 ff.
      42 Ghirshman, R. (1954). La village perse-achemenide, Mem. de la Mission
          archeologique en Iran, 36, pp. 38 ff.
      43 Golomshtok, E. A. and Griaznov, M. P. (1933). The Pazirik burial of
          Altai, Amer J. Archaeology, 37, pp. 30 ff; Talbot Rice, T. (1965). The
          Scythians. London, pp. 70 ff.
      44 Bokonyi, S. (1954). op. cit. pp. 100 ff.
      45 Antonius, O. (1922). Grundzuge einer Stammesgeschichte der Haustiere.
          Jena. p. 287.
      46 Recently Talbot Rice, T. (1965). ibid.
      47 Lhote, H. (1953). Le Cheval et le Chameau dans les peintures et gravures
          rupestres du Sahara, Bull, de VInst. fran$ais de VAfrique noir, pp. 1138 ff.
      48 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. pp. 330 ff.
       J. G. EVANS

       The exploitation of molluscs


 Molluscs have been exploited by man from the earliest times and for a wide
 variety of purposes. For instance, the extraction of the crimson dye, Tyrian
 Purple, from the dog winkles Murex spp. and Nucella spp., was known to both
the Phoenicians and the Minoans1. A vast quantity of shells was needed for
this process (about 8000 per gram of dye). Each shell was struck at a particular
point to remove the small gland which yields the dye, and such a technique
leaves clear evidence of the use to which the animals were put2. Another
pigment used in antiquity was Roman Sepia, obtained from the cuttlefish.
Where stone was scarce, strong shells were often used for raw materials as in
the manufacture of adze-blades from Tridacna on the coral islands of Poly¬
nesia. The shell of Cardium, the cockle, was used by neolithic people of the
Mediterranean for stamping their impressed-ware pottery (cardial decora¬
tion)3 though it should be pointed out that not all cardial decoration was
necessarily produced in this way, other sharp implements being used to
produce a similar effect. Mother-of-pearl, the nacreous lining of bivalve
shells, has always been a popular material, for inlay as in the Standard of Ur
and some of the grave furniture from Tutankhamen’s tomb, and more
recently for buttons and knife handles. Shells are often found far from the
sea in contexts which, at least on the basis of some modern ethnographic
parallels, suggest some sort of magico-religious association with the place of
origin of the culture4. A classic example is that of the mussel, Spondylus
gaederopus, found on Danubian sites as far north as the Rhineland from its
source in the Eastern Mediterranean5. From this may have evolved the idea of
shell trade or currency, although it is very possible that the latter developed in
some instances independently where there was a lack of metals. There are
innumerable examples too in prehistory of the adornment of the living and
the dead with shells, those of Dentalium, the tusk shell, being particularly
favoured. It is important in this connection to recognize however that the
perforation of shells may be done not by man but by certain predatory
molluscs8; this does not, of course, exclude the collection and use of such
perforated shells for necklaces and bangles. Among the earliest objects used
by man for personal adornment were pearls.
480   Part IV Animals     EVANS


   It is for their exploitation as a supply of food, however, that molluscs are
particularly noted and with which this paper is mainly concerned. The more
important food molluscs are the bivalves such as oysters, cockles and mussels;
the marine snails such as whelks, periwinkles and abalones; the cephalopods—
cuttlefish, octopus and squid; and the land snails7. The bivalves and marine
snails comprise part of the group popularly known as shellfish; the rest of this
group includes animals such as the crab and lobster which are not molluscs
but crustaceans and will not be discussed here.
    In the palaeolithic period shellfish were eaten by coastal-dwelling people
when and where available—for example by Mousterians at Devil’s Tower,
Gibraltar8—but there seems never to have been any special emphasis on
shellfish as a basic part of the economy. It was in the mesolithic period that
shellfish were exploited to their fullest, in some cases to the virtual exclusion
of all other types of animal food, and people who subsisted by this means have
been given the name “strandloopers”. Among the more important of these are
the Canalino culture of California9, the Hoabhinians and Toalians of the Far
East10, the Capsians of North Africa and the Tagus Valley in Spain11, the
Asturians of Cantalabria12, the Tardenoisians of Brittany13, the Ertebolle
people of Denmark14, and the Larnians and Obanians of North-west Britain15.
    The origin of this mode of life may be argued to have been a quite normal
one for coastal-dwelling people. However, in Western Europe the adoption
of a strandlooping existence is associated with the spread of the forests after
the end of the last glaciation, and a restriction of open areas available to
mesolithic man for hunting who is thus driven to the coasts to seek a liveli¬
hood. In California it is associated with a decrease in the area of forest and a
consequent reduction in the amount of game. In some cases there is an associa¬
tion with an island or coastal economy, where a ready supply of food of larger
animals was not available. Thus the rise in sea-level during the post-glacial
 period increased the length of coastline per surface area of land; and a close
 association is found for instance between sites of the Ertebolle culture with the
 ancient shore-line of the Littorina sea10. Perhaps too, strandloopers were
 peoples driven to the coasts by others living inland better able to cope with
 the conditions there. In some cases a shellfish economy is a seasonal occupa¬
 tion.
    The point at any rate seems clear: some kind of environmental change
 causes the mode of life of a people to be changed, from a primarily hunting
 or mixed economy to one based largely on food-gathering. Shellfish are as
 nourishing as a meat diet, if eked out by vegetable food; they contain large
 quantities of glycogen and need not be added to by animal flesh; moreover,
 their abundance per unit area is greater than that of any other food animal. But
 they do involve a lot of wasted labour in collecting since they produce the
 greatest bulk of refuse for a given quantity of edible substance17. The situa¬
 tion is neatly summarized as follows: “One suspects . . . that shellfish, as a
 main article of food, were eaten for lack of something better rather than from
                                              The exploitation of molluscs   481


choice—perhaps in bad seasons, in winter or when in unfamiliar surround¬
ings, so that the better potentialities of the place had still to be learned”18.
Indeed in certain cases, for example the Hoabhinians, strandloopers became
better able to cope with a variety of environments, with time evolving from an
economy based solely on shellfish to a mixed one of food-gathering and hunt¬
ing.
   An economy based to a large extent on shellfish occurred in many places
during the neolithic and later periods, but not to the universal extent of the
mesolithic period. Most characteristic are the impressed-ware sites where
poverty-striken peasants subsisted on a diet of shellfish but eked out also by
domestic cattle, as for example with the Sipontiano culture of Coppa Nevigata
in Italy19.
   The effect of man and other environmental factors on shellfish populations
can be studied on archaeological sites, and this is particularly so with sand
middens where a technique known as column sampling can be applied20. This
involves taking bulk samples at intervals through a vertical column of deposits
and analysing them for shellfish remains. The results can then be plotted in
the form of a histogram as has been done in Fig. 1 for a prehistoric site in the
Isle of Harris, Inverness. The basic diet on this site was of marine shellfish
with domestic animals, and certain foods (possibly delicacies) such as the
oyster, Ostrea edulis, and the freshwater mussel, Margaritifera margaritifera.




Fig 1 Diagram showing changes in relative abundance of various food
     molluscs in a prehistoric midden at Northton, Isle of Harris, Scotland.
482    Part IV Animals     Evans

 Similarly on a Californian site of the Canalino culture a change from an
 economy based largely on abalone to one on mussels took place. Changes such
 as these reflect differences in availability of the various species. In the
 Californian case this was caused by man for the abalone was eaten out of
 existence. But availability may also depend on environmental factors;
 Cardium, for example, is most abundant in estuaries on a muddy substratum,
 while Patella and Mytilus are more common on rocky shores. Changes in the
 availability of such substrata may relate to changes of sea-level and thus be
 reflected in man’s economy. Man may also exploit a small number of shellfish
 species to a much greater extent than the majority for reasons perhaps of
 seasonal availability, ease of collection or edibility, and severe depletion of the
 stock may eventually lead to extinction and enable other species to build up
 their numbers which are then taken over as a food supply21. Changes caused
thus by man may be accentuated by the natural enemies of shellfish, while
 climatic changes, notably of temperature, may also result in population
 changes22.
    But while exploitation may lead to changes in the composition of shellfish
 populations there is no evidence to suggest that shellfish have ever been
 “domesticated”; i.e. selectively bred to produce a stock which differs genetic¬
ally from the wild ancestor. Domestication as a natural process under con¬
ditions of association with man is highly unlikely when one considers how
remote is the biological contact between man and mollusc, each occupying an
entirely different life medium. And exploitation will never lead towards domes¬
tication, only away from it, sometimes resulting even in extinction. Deliberate
domestication too is a practical impossibility since the method of reproduc¬
tion involves the releases of the gametes into the sea, so that there can be little
control over mating. The cultivation of oysters is perhaps the closest to
domestication but even here what is accomplished only affects growth, in
order to obtain a maximum yield per area of sea bed, without in any way
altering the genetic make-up of the stock.
   1 urning to land snails, where the environmental medium is rather closer
to that of man, the possibilities of domestication taking place are greater. In
prehistoric times, land snails were exploited often to the same extent as
marine molluscs—to wit, the vast shell middens of the North African
Capsians known as escargotieres—and as with marine molluscs selective
exploitation sometimes took place. Thus in Iran, Reed has shown how Helix
salomonica was exploited in favour of the apparently equally abundant and
acceptable Levantina diulfensis23, while Cain has suggested the avoidance of
certain morphs of the polymorphic snail, H. nemoralis, at an Iron Age site in
England, perhaps for religious reasons24; this latter is of interest in being an
example of intraspecific exploitation. But such processes must surely lead
away from domestication, not towards it.
   Deliberate domestication of a species of large snail (probably H. pomatia)
seems to have been accomplished by the Romans, variations being kept
                                                 The exploitation of molluscs    483


separate in vivaria and bred for such characters as size, colour, and fecundity25.
 This practice, however, has not been maintained and one suspects that it was
 from the first more of an academic experiment rather than a policy engendered
 by economic hardship.
    Under more natural conditions, the association of snails and man has not
led to domestication but it is interesting to see how this association has
become closer since the neolithic period and along lines which might well
have resulted in domestication. The greatest initial impact of man on the
environment was during the neolithic period and such changes as were pro¬
duced affected the snail population more then than at any subsequent time.
At first, changes in the populations of mollusca were a direct reflection of
environmental changes. Shade- and moisture-loving species were either
greatly suppressed, becoming restricted to area undisturbed by man, or were
eliminated totally. Xerophiles and heliophiles, however, flourished and
colonized large tracts of previously wooded country. With time, certain
species of both the shade-loving and the xerophile/heliophile groups altered
their ecology to the extent that they came to live in such close association
with human habitations as to become almost entirely dependent on man for
their existence26. Such molluscs are distinguished as synanthropic and it is
these, if any, which might have become domesticated. But this is as far as the
process has gone. Thus the synanthropic species, H. aspersa and H. pomatia,
are both edible and eaten to the present day in Britain and the Continent; but
there is no question of domestication, only of collection during certain
seasons.
   Thus while the example of the Romans shows that the potential is there,
land snails have not become domesticated either through deliberate selective
breeding or through a more natural association with man. The reasons for
this are various but connected perhaps with the fact that molluscs are of little
hindrance to man in the wild state, and yet are sufficiently abundant to be
profitably collected on a mesolithic food-gathering basis.




      Notes
      1 Jackson, J. W. (1916). The geographical distribution of the shell-purple
        industry, Memoirs and Proc. Manchester Lit. and Phil. Soc., 60 (7).
      2 Information from W. T. Stearn (in discussion).
      3 Childe, V. G. (1957). The Dawn of European Civilization. London, p. 58.
      4 Jackson, J. W. (1917). Shells as evidence of the migrations of Early Culture.
        London.
      5 Clark, J. G. D. (1952). Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. London,
        pp. 241-3. It appears to be uncertain whether Spondylus gaederopus does
        in "fact occur in the Black Sea as quoted by Clark. (N. Shackleton, Per¬
        sonal communication).
      6 Ansell, A. D. (i960). Observations on predation of Venus striatula (da
        Costa) by Natica alderi (Forbes), Proc. Malacol. Soc., 34, pp. 157-64.
484   Part IV Animals      EVANS


       7 Symposium on Edible Molluscs (i960). Proc. Malacol. Soc., 34, pp.
          113-56.
       8 Garrod, D. A. E. et al. (1928). Excavation of a Mousterian rock-shelter at
          Devil’s Tower, Gibraltar, J. Roy. Anthrop. Inst., 58, pp. 34-113.
       9 Meighan, C. W. et al. (1958). Ecological interpretation in archaeology:
         part I, Amer. Antiq., 24, pp. 1-23.
      10 Cornwall, I. W. (1964). The World of Ancient Man. London.
      11 Balout, L. (1955). Prehistoire de TAfrique du Nord. Paris; Obermaier, H.
          (1925). Fossil Man in Spain. Yale.
      12 Obermaier, H. (1925). ibid.
      13 Just Pequart, M. and St. (1954). Hoedic. Anvers.
      14 Clark, J. G. D. (1936). The Mesolithic Settlement of Northern Europe.
          Cambridge.
      15 Lacaille, A. D. (1954). The Stone Age in Scotland. Oxford; Movius, N. J.,
         Jr. (1942). The Irish Stone Age. Cambridge.
      16 Clark, J. G. D. (1936). ibid.
      17 Townsend, M. (1967). The common limpet (Patella vulgata) as a source
          of protein, Folia Biologica, 15, pp. 343-51.
      18 Cornwall, I. W. (1964). op. cit. p. 223.
      19 Puglisi, S. M. (1955). Industria microlitica nei livelli a ceramica impressa
          di Coppa Nevigata, Riv. Sci. Prehist., 10, pp. 19-37.
      20 Meighan, C. W. et al. (1958). ibid.
      21 For instance, in France today, the oyster which is mainly cultivated is
          Ostrea angulata; before 1914 only the more northerly O. edulis was
         present: while in the mesolithic period, both species were present. See
         Just Pequart, M. and St. (1954). ibid.
      22 Thus in the shell mounds of the Asturians, Monodonta (Trochus) lineata
         replaces Littorina littorea, the latter being the characteristic form of the
          Upper Palaeolithic and Azilian middens; this change is said to be climatic¬
          ally caused.
      23 Reed, C. A. (1962). Snails on a Persian hillside: Ecology, Prehistory-
          gastronomy, Postilla:Yale Peabody Mus., 66.
      24 Cain, A. J. (1967). The large snails, in Avery, M. et al. Rainsborough,
         Northants, England: Excavations 1961-5, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp.
          305-6.
      25 Pliny’s Natural History. 9, p. 173.
      26 Kerney, M. P. (1965). Snails and man in Britain, J. Concho!., 26, pp. 3-14.
      DUNCAN NOBLE

      The Mesopotamian onager as a draught animal


The Mesopotamian onager is an extinct member of the family of half-asses
now represented by the common or Persian onager and the Indian onager. It
became extinct in the early twentieth century when it succumbed to the
effects of continued hunting and the depredations of troops in the First
World War. The last reported sighting of Mesopotamian onagers was by the
traveller Carl Raswan1 in the late twenties of this century near the Jebel
Sinjar. In 1928 one was in the Schonbrunn Zoo, Vienna2, and a photograph
survives.
  The Mesopotamian onager was a light, swift, animal standing one metre
(nine hands three inches) at the withers according to Antonius3 and was as
fast as the horse, if without its staying powers. Its ears were longer than the
horse’s but shorter than those of the ass and the Indian onager. It had the
erect mane of the wild horse but was distinguishable by the tail which was
tufted from half way along its length. It appears from its muzzled representa¬
tions to have been a difficult animal to use and not ideal for draught purposes.
The Director of Whipsnade Park of the Zoological Society of London states4
of the Persian onagers in his keeping that they are unhandleable and indeed
unapproachable with inherently intractable dispositions and, while reasonably
fleet of foot, are narrow-chested—not the sign of a good draught animal.
  From evidence of onagers’ bones at Anau, level I5, c. 4800 b.c., and Sialk
II6 c. 3500 b.c. there is no doubt that onagers7 were hunted for food in
prehistoric times, as they were later by the Assyrians and the Arabs. But it is
from Sumerian levels (c. 2500 b.c.) and the Uruk period preceding that the
Mesopotamian onager appears as a draught animal.
 It may be that clay discs from Tepe Gawra XVIII c. 4000 b.c. represent
wheels and a Halaf sherd from level XVI c. 3900 b.c. shows two onagers.
Thereafter the first clear indication of the use of wheeled vehicles is in
pictograms from tablets from Uruk level IV c. 3100 b.c. Terracotta model
wagons and chariots appear in Tepe Gawra VIII in the Jemdet Nasr level
c. 3000 b.c. and in Sumerian Early Dynastic times (2370-2900 b.c.) vehicles
occur in considerable numbers as models, paintings on pottery, and chariot
burials at Ur, Kish, and Susa. That a considerable number of these wagons
486   Part IV Animals     NOBLE


and chariots were pulled by onagers is clear from the shell inlay called the
Standard of Ur8 (Plate Ia) and the mother-of-pearl fragments of the
Standard of Mari9, and from a scarlet ware vase from Khafaje from an E.D.I.
level and a bronze model from Tell Agrab (E.D.III.) (Plate Ib).
   That the onager was ridden is less certain and we depend for our informa¬
tion on terracotta models of riders from Susa from which the animal is not
easily identified. It appears likely that if the onager was ridden, it was not so
used as a regular means of transport.
   The war panel on the Standard from the Royal Tombs of Ur shows in its
lowest register four successive stages of the charge of a chariot against a
barbarian enemy. It is a heavy vehicle with four solid wheels, each made of
three planks. The body has a wooden framework and a high front to which is
lashed a quiver of javelins. The framework is panelled in leather or basket-
work and models from Susa10 have markings indicating that basketry was
used. The vehicle is drawn by four onagers harnessed abreast to a yoke
lashed to the curved pole which is attached to the base of the chariot. On the
pole is a double ring through which the reins pass and the onagers are yoked
by their collars from which hang pointed streamers which would increase
their frightening aspect. Also from Ur comes a rein ring surmounted by a
statuette of an onager. As the yoke is not visible in the inlay, it is most likely
that it extends over the withers of the inner beasts only and the collars of the
outer animals are lashed to its extremities. This interpretation is borne out by
the chariot from Tell Agrab described below. The animals have headstalls
whose nosebands extend forward, partially to muzzle them. This conclusion
is reinforced by the heads of onagers shown on the fragments of the stylistic¬
ally similar inlays found in the temples of Ishtar and Ninni-Zaza at Mari. The
fragment from the early dynastic temple of Ishtar shows a headstall essentially
identical to the Ur one, and those from the slightly later temple of Ninni-
Zaza illustrate headstalls with muzzles of plaited material covering the lower
jaw and also the whole muzzle—a subsequent modification.
   The question of how the animals were controlled has been discussed. A
ring is shown in front of the Ur onagers’ noses and Woolley11 considered that
it represented the rings of a bit, while noting that the oxen which pulled the
king’s essentially similar car found in grave PG/789 were guided by a ring
through the nostrils. Hilzheimer12 thought that the reins were attached to the
headstall. But Schaeffer13 has come to what appears to be the correct con¬
clusion in finding from a comparison of the Ur and Mari inlays that the ring
was in fact passed through the flesh of the upper lip.
   The crew consisted of the driver who wielded a long forked goad to urge on
his animals and standing behind him a soldier shown carrying at one time a
javelin and at another an axe.
  To gain an idea of the size of the vehicles we note that the ox wagons of
grave PG/789 had wheels of diameter between 60 and 100 cm. From the Y
cemetery at Kish in grave Y237 (E.D.III) comes a burial with a four-wheeled
                           The Mesopotamian onager as a draught animal        487


 wagon pulled by equids of which the excavator was able to distinguish the
wheels and the chassis and curved hoops on the sides which suggest that it
was a freight vehicle. It had wheels of 50 cm. diameter with axles 90 cm. long
and the chassis was 45 cm. wide. This suggests that the chariots were long
narrow vehicles and with hardwood being used in their construction the Ur
 Standard ones would have had a tare weight of 275 kg. (605 lb.) or up to
410 kg. (900 lb.) with crew. The Kish chariot had bronze nails studded round
the rim of the wheels although these are not shown in the Ur and Mari
chariots. But round the wheels of the Ur ox waggons Woolley was able to
distinguish a grey powder which he took to be the remains of leather tyres.
   Terracotta models from Tepe Gawra14 and Kish A cemetery15 (E.D.III)
and Susa16 show two-wheeled versions of the type of conveyance described
above with a high front often with two holes for the reins to pass through.
But a different type is evidenced by a bronze model found in an E.D.II
context at Tell Agrab17 and by a terracotta model from the A cemetery at
Kish18. The Tell Agrab model portrays four onagers yoked as were the
Ur Standard beasts to a two-wheeled chariot with a straight pole which
forms also the body of the car astride which sits the driver who has before
him a high wooden protection of two upright timbers with a semi-circular
top. The wheels are again solid, made of planks, and protected by pointed
bronze nails round the rim.
   The Kish model has a body which is rounded like a saddle with the marks
of a fleece thrown over it while the front is square with crossed struts like the
Ur chariots. A limestone plaque from the Third Dynasty of Ur19 shows a
chariot pulled by felines and it is also like a saddle with a leopard skin thrown
over it.
   We notice that there are no nails in the wheels of the four-wheeled Ur and
Mari chariots which are definitely used for war, while they are found on two¬
wheeled chariots and also on the four-wheeled chariot on the Khafaje vase
which appears to be a processional vehicle. As there is no evidence of a
swinging front axle, it may be that while in a light two-wheeled chariot or
peaceful wagon the nails contributed greatly to lateral stability, in a fighting
chariot smooth leather tyres gave adequate protection to the wheels and yet
allowed them to slide sideways when cornering at speed. But turning must
have been difficult as from the Tell Agrab model we know that the lip ring
on the outer animal on the left was attached by a single rein to the ring
through its companion’s lip from which led a rein which the driver held in his
left hand while he guided the other pair in similar fashion with a rein in his
right hand. To turn to the left the driver pulled in on his left-hand rein, there¬
by checking his left pair and at the same time pulling it to the right and away
from the direction of the turn. The collar, pressing on the animals’ wind
pipes and jugular veins would at the same time reduce the control and their
tractive effort.
   The chariots which the driver sat asu ide can hardly have been used against
           *   *
17—DOPAA
488    Part IV Animals        noble


an enemy as the driver would have been fully occupied with his team and
unable to defend himself. Rather must they have been used for scouting or as
a commander’s personal transport. With the four-wheeled chariots little
manoeuvre can have been possible. We may consider that the onagers were
pointed in the desired direction and held by grooms until the opportune
moment when they were launched against the foe. The soldier’s axe and spear
can only have been for personal defence as four animals would cut a swathe
two and a half metres wide through the enemy ranks and any persons within
reach would already have been trampled over. As the enemy line was
approached the spearman can have had time to throw only two spears before
the chariot passed through the opposing forces or was brought to a stand¬
still. The real weapon was the onagers’ hooves and the effect was psycho¬
logical rather than material.
   And then in Akkadian times, c. 2300 B.c., with the introduction of the more
dependable horse, the onager for ever passed out of use as a draught animal.



      Notes
        1 Raswan, C. R. (1935). Black Tents of Arabia. Boston.
       2 Antonius, O. (1928-9). Der syrische Halbesel, Der zoologische Garten, 1,
          pp.19-25.
       3 Antonius, O. (1928-9). ibid.
       4 Personal communication.
       5 Pumpelly, R. (1908). (1908). Explorations in Turkestan, Expedition of
          1904. 2. Washington.
       6 Ghirshman, R. (1938-9). Fouilles de Sialk. Paris.
       7 The excavators identify the Anau and Sialk equids as horses but Zeuner,
          F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, p. 316, identifies
          them as onagers.
       8 Woolley, C. L. (1934). Ur Excavations II, The Royal Cemetery. London,
          pp. 269-73 and pi. 92.
       9 Parrot, A. (1956). Mission archeologique de Mari, I: Le Temple d'Ishtar.
          Paris, pp. 136-46 and pi. LVI.
      10 Mecquenem, R. de. (1943). Memoires de la Mission Archeologique en Iran,
          29. Archeologie Susienne, Paris. Fig. 91b.
      11 Woolley, C. L. (1934). op. cit. p. 270.
      12 Hilzheimer, M. (1931). Die Anschurrung bei den alten Sumerien,
         Praehistorische Z.
      13 Schaeffer, C. L. (1938). Contribution a l’etude de 1’attelage Sumerien et
         Syrien aux Ille et lie millenaires, Prehistoire, 6.
      14 Speiser, E. A. (1935)- Excavations at Tepe Gawra, I. Philadelphia, pis.
         XXXIVc and LXXVIII.
      15 MacKay, E. (1929). A Sumerian Palace and the A cemetery at Kish,
         Mesopotamia, Chicago, pi. XLVI.
      16 Mecquenem, R. de. (1943). op. cit. pi. XLVI. 3.
      17 Prankfort, H. (1937). Revelations of early Mesopotamian culture. Illus¬
         trated London News, 6 (Nov.); Frankfort, H. (1943). More Sculpture from
         the Diyala Region. Chicago, p. 12.
      18 MacKay, E. (1929). op. cit. pi. XLVI. 7.
      19 Woolley, C. L. (1934). op. cit. pi. 181b.
       CLIFFORD OWEN

       The domestication of the ferret


 The three lines of investigation used in studying domestication are archae¬
 ological, zoological, and historical.
    In studying the ferret only the second two have been pursued. This
 communication suggests ways in which attention to the problem by archae¬
 ologists might be of real value.
   A very brief outline of what is known will be given and suggestions made
for work needing to be done.
   Historical material starts with a mention by Aristophanes1, c. 450 B.C., in a
comedy, of an animal which might have been the ferret, followed by Aristotle2,
c. 350 B.C., but the correct translation of the Greek word used has been the
subject of much argument. Although Aristotle states that this animal could
become very mild and tame, there is reason to suppose that other members of
the weasel tribe may have been kept in a semi-domesticated state for the
control of small rodents. These references gave rise to considerable philo¬
logical discussion in the sixteenth century but the issue remains undecided.
   The first reference which can be said with any probability to relate to the
ferret is that of Strabo3 (fl. about 63 B.c. to A.D. 24). He states that a Libyan
animal, bred purposely, was muzzled and put into rabbit holes when it
either pulls out the rabbit with its claws or causes it to bolt to the men and
dogs standing ready. The fact that this method is still used by the Ruafa of
Morocco suggests that it is an accurate and authentic description, and that
the animal used was the ferret.
   The use of the ferret for rabbit catching would appear to have been the
reason for the domestication of this somewhat troublesome animal and its use
is associated with the spread of the rabbit as a semi-domesticated food animal
and, later, a feral species. The rabbit appears originally to have been in¬
digenous to Spain and possibly North Africa; the occasion for Strabo’s
remarks was a plague of rabbits in the Balearic Islands, to which they had
been introduced. The use of the ferret for killing rats is not mentioned until
later,. It appears to have been less important than its use in rabbiting, and this
contribution will be confined to a discussion of the latter use. However, rat¬
ting should be borne in mind in the appropriate contexts.
490   Part IV Animals     OWEN


   Pliny4 (a.d. 23-79) also mentions the rabbit and the ferret. The next
reference is in a.d. 600, by Isidore of Seville5, to the ferret and rabbit¬
hunting. After this, as is to be expected, references are scarce until mediaeval
manuscripts. Many of these contain variations of what Aristotle said; little
of real value can be found until the habit of observation and reporting of
contemporary life became established.
   Then, some idea of the extent of the spread of both rabbit and ferret
can be gathered. Illustrations in manuscripts provide evidence for the breed¬
ing of domesticated rabbits of different colours (black and white) by 1516,
and for the existence of rabbit warrens and the use of ferrets. The most
important of these is a splendid copy of the Livre de Chasse of Gaston, Comte
de Foixs, who reigned over two principalities in Southern France and
Northern Spain. This copy shows ferreting in full swing with purse nets,
and a ferret wearing a muzzle. Gaston de Foix wrote this book between 1st
May 1387 and his death about four years later.
   In the thirteenth century references to ferrets show that they had spread
northwards to Germany before 1245. It is frequently stated that Genghis
Khan used ferrets at Termed in 1221. Termed is probably Termez, on the
Oxus river, about 160 miles south of Samarkand. The statement comes from
an English book of 18267, derived from a French work of 17228, quoting from
a compilation attributed to the Imam Mehemet bin Ahmed Azzahabi, born in
Cairo and died in Samarkand in 1345. It is important that the work by
Azzahabi be traced if possible. Dr. M. Lings of the British Museum has
kindly offered to look into the problem. Until the result of his investigation is
known it would perhaps be advisable to treat this evidence of the use of the
ferret in Afghanistan with reserve.
   Queen Mary’s Psalter of about 1340 shows ferrets being used by well-
dressed women but the translation of Gaston de Foix, made by Edward 2nd
Duke of York during his captivity in Pevensey Castle between 1406 and 1413,
has an interpolation to the effect that no one hunts rabbits except fur-
hunters—indicating that this form of the chase may not have enjoyed the
same esteem as it did on the continent of Europe by that period.
   Earlier references to the ferret can be found in laws and court rolls. The
first known in England is for 1223 and there are references to a ferreter
attached to the Court in 1281. References to the ownership of ferrets by a
Bishop and a Prior indicate the importance of rabbits to church establish¬
ments ; a law limiting the ownership of ferrets to those with an annual income
of forty shillings, passed in 1390, indicates that by that time poaching was a
problem. Warrens were carefully designed; sometimes walled or paled; and
where necessary had raised banks to provide dry quarters for the rabbits. It
can be taken that wherever warrens were established ferrets were used, and
were therefore important items in the domestic economy.
   The circulation of printed books marks another increment in the informa¬
tion on the ferret. It was accurately described in Conrad Gesner’s9 work on
                                             The domestication of the ferret   491


  quadrupeds, published at Zurich in 1551. Gesner describes it as the colour of
  wool stained with urine—which gives a very good impression of die colour of
  the white ferret, here mentioned for the first time. The original ferret was
  undoubtedly the colour of a wild polecat and we do not know at what period
  the break to white occurred. The only earlier reference to colour is by implica¬
  tion in the poem “The Siege of Thebes” by John of Lydgate10 (probably
  written in 1421) where the red eyes of the ferret are mentioned. As only white
  ferrets have red eyes it is probable that a white ferret is meant.
     Consideration of the colour of the animal brings us to an appraisal of the
  zoological evidence on the possible origin of the domestic form. The ferret’s
  ancestor is the wild polecat. There are two forms—eastern and western. The
 present distribution of these forms is not accurately known; nor is their
 taxonomic position, their previous distribution, nor the precise region where
 the animal was domesticated. It has been claimed that the ferret was domesti¬
 cated in Morocco from a wild species; the writer does not think this is proven
 and his evidence for this view is in preparation11. Attempts to equate the ferret
 with one or other of these wild forms have mostly depended on comparison of
 skull measurements, and opinions have varied. The most sophisticated of
 these attempts has used multivariate analysis. In the view of Udo Rempe the
 ferret is derived from the western form of polecat. The present writer has
 endeavoured to compare the behaviour and ease of taming and breeding of
 the two forms but has unfortunately been unable to obtain live specimens of
 the eastern polecat. If (as discussed by Rohrs12) the idea of domestication
 travelled rather than the animal itself it is possible that both the eastern and
 western forms were domesticated.
    The material used has been skulls of modem polecats and ferrets from
 museum collections and this leads naturally to the question of the skull
 characteristics of ferrets used in the earlier period of its use.
    The archaeological material bearing on this problem is remarkable for its
complete absence. Out of all the activity, year in year out, of providing
considerable quantities of food by the use of the ferret—nothing remains. The
whole purpose of this communication is to bring to light material unknown to
the writer and to make it more likely that relevant material is not overlooked.
The bones of ferrets, like those of the rabbits they pursue, are difficult:
first, many archaeologists do not save small bones or may not record them
adequately—this practice, though diminishing, regrettably persists; secondly,
rabbits are the most intrusive creatures and ferrets have to follow them. Only
in exceptional cases is one able to exclude the possibility of contamination by
later burrowing. It is therefore vital to treat with extreme care any rabbit or
ferret bones underneath sealed layers, and to save carefully every piece of
skeletal material and any possible associated objects.
    Objects which could be associated with ferreting are not many and their
identification is difficult. Those most frequently mentioned are muzzles and
nets—both unlikely to survive. However, there are some more robust items.
492   Part IV Animals      OWEN


Bells were frequently used to alarm the rabbits and to cause them to run
before they could be caught.
   Although ferret bells are not recorded this is not as surprising as it might
seem. They would be difficult to distinguish from bells used as ornaments of
dress or for falconry and hawking—they might be readily linked with the
merlin, sparrowhawk or kestrel.
   However, the illustration of a ferret in Gesner (PI. iv b) perhaps shows it
wearing what may be the type of bell used—which is not like bells used for
falconry today. In 1378 eight white iron chains for ferrets are included in an
inventory of a haberdasher’s shop. It would be impossible to determine their
use if recovered from the site today.
   Muzzles may have been made of metal, though the practice of tying the lips
of a ferret together through a hole in the upper and nether lip on each side
would make these superfluous. There is an interesting mention of silver rings
being used for this purpose in Lower Germany and a report that gipsies in
England knew of this practice in the present century is of interest. A number
of patterns of metal muzzle are in use today but the date of their introduction
is unknown—several of them appear to be of nineteenth-century origin.
Ancillary tools, for digging out ferrets which “lay up”, often of a special
shape, were commonly used—but these are difficult to separate from agri¬
cultural implements or tools used for digging out foxes or badgers. Boxes and
bags were used for carrying ferrets and these might be identifiable.
   In order to assist in the classification of these objects it would help if sites
of mediaeval establishments of importance could be searched for the place in
which ferrets were kept. Objects found in such places would possibly be for
use with ferrets and themselves might establish the use of the building. The
household books of the Lord William Howard of Naworth Castle13 (1618-33)
give some idea of what might be found. The Warrener had a house with a
slate roof which may have had a brick floor. He had a wallet for his ferrets,
seven yards of coarse cloth for his bed, eight yards of cloth for a pair of
blankets, a hank of yarn for mending his net, a paddle staff with iron on it,
traps made by the man who mended the wains, probably of wood, but
possibly of iron, a ferret line and, in 1622, a room was made for the ferrets at
Cumrach. This, and the wages paid to him, indicate that he was a servant of
some importance and that a warrener might occupy a house sturdy enough to
present substantial remains. Among these, or in the room for the ferrets,
might be found objects related to his work. The accommodation for the
ferrets in this case seems to have been distinguishable but in many cases
they may have been kept in wooden hutches, or in barrels—a common
practice for hundreds of years.
   Careful watch for evidence of ferreting can then be expected to yield
results in remains of houses of servants, in outhouses, and in the raised banks
of made warrens which, it is suggested in “The Countrie Farme”14, should be
sited between the hilly and the fertile ground of a Park, and near to the Lodge,
                                           The domestication of the ferret   493


and possibly represented in Britain by the “pillow-mounds” of Crawford15.
   In earlier or simpler communities the ferret may have been tethered, as in
Morocco today, in a section of cork-oak bark hung from the roof of the
dwelling house. The use of nets or metal accessories would be unknown.
Under these circumstances ferret skeletons within the house area would be of
significance.
   The writer would be most grateful for notice of any known material
evidence of the use of the ferret, up to and including the mid-nineteenth
century.



      Notes
      1 Aristophanes. The Acharnians.
      2 Aristotle. Historia Animalium.
      3 Strabo. Geographica, Book III 2. 6.
      4 Pliny’s Natural History. 8, 55.
      5 Isidore. Patrologie. 1850. Paris.
      6 Gaston Phebus, Comte de Foix. MS Francais 616, Bibliotheque Nationale,
        Paris.
      7 Ranking, J. (1826). Historical Researches on the Wars and Sports of the
        Mongols. London.
      8 Croix, Petis de la (1722). The History of Genghizcan the Great. London.
      9 Gesner, C. (1551). Historiae Animalium. Zurich.
     10 Lydgate, John. (c. 1421). Siege of Thebes. Early English Text. Soc. Extra
        Series, 1911.
     11 Owen, C. E. In preparation.
     12 Rohrs, M. (1961). Biologische Anschauungen fiber Begriff v. Wesen der
        Domestikation, Z. Tierzucht. Ziicht Biol., 76 (i), pp. 7-23.
     13 Selections from the Household books of the Lord William Howard of
        Naworth Castle. 1878. Surtees Soc. 68.
     14 Estienne, C. (1586). Maison Rustique.
     15 Crawford, O. G. S. and Keiller, A. (1928). Wessex from the Air. Oxford.
      M. L. RYDER

      Changes in the fleece of sheep following domestication
      (with a note on the coat of cattle)


Although it seems clear that the coat of cattle has changed far less than that of
sheep since domestication, it is fortunate that the wild form of sheep is still in
existence to demonstrate the extent of the change in sheep, which has been
brought about mainly through the selective breeding by man towards
different kinds of fleeces suitable for textiles.
   The main changes that have occurred in the coat of the sheep are as
follows:

1 Pigment has been lost; wild sheep, and some primitive domestic breeds are
coloured, whereas most modern breeds are white, at any rate in the main
fleece area. Apart from being unwanted in white garments, pigment inter¬
feres with dyeing, and so the desire to eliminate naturally-coloured wool
fibres from fleeces could have begun with the development of dyeing. The
mode of inheritance of colour in different breeds is likely to throw light on
their affinities and evolution.

2 Domestic sheep no longer moult; wild sheep moult their coat completely each
spring, and many primitive breeds show considerable fleece shedding, but the
more highly evolved breeds have almost lost the tendency to shed wool.
Fleece shedding can mean considerable loss of wool to the farmer, and so
man would wish to select against it, but a satisfactory means of obtaining the
wool would first have to be available in the form of iron sheep shears.

3 Hairiness has decreasedhairiness is undesirable because of the coarse fibre
diameter, the harsh “handle”, and the difficulty of dyeing hairy fibres.



      Early changes

The coat of the wild sheep consists of a relatively short hairy outer coat, and
an even shorter woolly undercoat, which is obscured by the outer coat1. The
496   Part IV Animals    RYDER


hairy fibres are about 6 cm. long, and are bristly in character, being known as
kemps (Fig. i). The main change in fleece structure since domestication can
therefore be regarded as a development of the wool at the expense of the kemp
(Fig. 2). The wool of sheep provides a paradox which leads to considerations
like that of Flannery2 on why it should have appeared. Wool was not a
product of domestication, yet it was insufficiently developed in the wild
animal to provide a reason for domestication.




  So far as I am aware, no sheepskin or wool from the neolithic period is
available for examination. Neolithic textiles usually turn out to be flax. One
assumes therefore that the coat of the first domestic sheep would have been
little different from that of the wild sheep before domestication. And, in fact,
some of the most primitive sheep in existence today, the so-called “hair”
sheep of tropical Africa and the hot plains of India, have a short kempy coat
with an undercoat of fine wool3. Although some of these breeds are brown, the
wild colour pattern has apparently been lost, and some are black and others
white. This type of coat has been interpreted as an adaptation to a hot environ¬
ment4, but the more likely explanation is that it has undergone little change
from that of the wild sheep although there is evidence of a reduction in the
undercoat in some. It may be that man lacked the stimulus to select for wool
to provide clothing in a hot environment.
   It is unlikely as suggested by Flannery5 that a woolly coat developed as a
result of natural selection towards a coat providing insulation in a hot environ-
                                          Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep               497




                                Fibre Diameter Measurements in /j
FINEWOOL (MERINO mean 22 5/u)   SH0RTW001 (fJORFOLK HORN mean 27-5 /j)   LONCWOOL(COTSWOLD mean 42 3/j)


Fig 2 Changes in fibre diameter distribution during fleece evolution. Measure¬
       ments from fleece of sheep remaining today have been given, but the last
       five distributions have been found in textiles of the Roman period.


ment. Wool is more likely to have been developed by man in a relatively cold
environment, the insulation of the sheep against heat being a purely secondary
and incidental feature of a fine-woolled fleece.
  White as well as black and piebald sheep are depicted in Ancient Egypt
before 2000 B.C., and the animals appear to have a short, kempy coat, although
the rams have a throat fringe like that found in wild rams6. The only wool
examined from this period was from a tomb of the “Old Kingdom”. This was
unspun, white, and had a length of 2 cm. which may not have been the full
498   Part IV Animals               RYDER




                                                                           a
                                                                           p
                     _ r—'                                    .q
                     ‘"3                     *3
                                                     •3
                                                      <u      T3
                                                                          'U
                                                                           <1>
                                                                                 •a
                                                                                  0
               S      <L>                    <L>
                                                      g
                                                               a>
                                                                           g      g
                      g
                      V-i                    g
                                             l-t               g
                                     <L>              E?             tr.fr        fr
                      d                       d                d
                      a>             P        <D      a        0      s §         S3
                      00             <3       bo               OX)   <3 43       43

                      <u                      <L>     <D       <L>                u
                     <J31                            <1                          <3
                                         ll                          gl           1
                     0
                     4-J
                                         •rj O       ■M
                                                      6        6
                                                              ■M
                                                                     .3   0       0
                                                                                 ■M
                                          & Y                        ^ V
               3     T3              4—1 § T>        TJ       T3     <u T3       TJ
                     <u               03 q d>         V        <u    P <L>        <D
                     £                O               £        £     q £          £
                     <D                   a ^         <L>
                     ^4             rPa P <u                   <L>   H <U        V
                                                              ^4     >.^4
                      03              C3     03      03        03    03 03       CO

                     00             VO               00       00     00 00



               I

                                                     o
                                    VO               O        VO     Tf          fO
                                    vb       00               6\     On 00       vb


               8?
                             00
                             Tf
                             VO
                             Tf                                                        50(1%)
                                       N
                             <N        m o  rt
                                                                                       62, 88 (2%)
                             Tf
                     <N rv          vp ^ 00 ^
                     m vo
                     I cr>
                     (N




                                             X       X        X      X X         X
                                     x       X       X        X      X X         X
                                     x       X       X        X      X X         X
              sf
                             D
                             M
                             <      u                                     u

                     ►. a
                             <L>
                                    PQ                                    «
               «                    O                                     o
                                    O                                     o
              Q     I s             VO
                    W PQ
                    ’S
                    &
                     C
                     <D                             M
                    rCJu                            u
                                                    o
                     CO
                     tj >»                          oT T3
              to                                    P S
                    II
                    <L>
                    4-J             V    .          co OX)
                    fi oP           Vh <u
                                    03              ' ►>! P
                                       o
                    £               X




               a
              co    •S u >S u
                    ° « o a
                    i cii d
                    « -g a .g

                    3 13 !
                    ^        g CO   g

                                                    w
                               Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep     499


                                                   ^3
                                                    g
                                                    I:
                                                    5T            VO
                                                                   I
                                                                   co
                                                                   m
                                                     &
                                                                   d
                                                    <0             d


                                                                  s
                                                                  <u
                                                      T3          Q
                                  TJ4>                73          si
                                                      as           .0

                                                       'd              Q
                                                                       D
                                                        d
                                                        oJ
                                                                   8
                                                       U           o
                                                                   o
                                                                   8
                                                                       O
a
g N N Tt-
dj O C4                                                            o
44                                                      o          O
                                                        X4
                                                        o
                                                        V-i
ro«^Mcnr-
                                                        ffl
£ N C4 rj h
             d
              6                     os
                                    >>                   d
              4)
             44                    4-J
                                                         <u        Xl
                                                         >
                                    d4>                  03
                                                         *-i       pd
                                                                       d
     d       +
                                    u                    bO
      a      d-                                          d
      4)     vo                    jg                                  <u
     44
             N
              1
                                   ■3                              X)<L)
     +       d-              CO     u           * -8
     VO      +         r- t                     0 £?
      <s               <S 10       J      <u     ; 44                  4>
       1 /              1 CO       T3    y         co                  X3
      CO
      M
                       00           C3    2
                                   "H W 1) >>    £s <£2
      X      X     X                C X! T3 >
      X      X     X                §.5fgS
     T3                             O To d d
      d          ■S                              S cd
      a           o     .          "d
     X)     u t2
     •d +-» 4) d
      o3 a b£)
                                    s            bo
                                                 TTH t-H               g
                                                  N <u
      4>                                                               o
     X4 ^« ^ 2c                                   <0 >
                                                 tQ       O            o
                                                  1                    £
                                                  S n
                                                    <L>
                       u                         CQ rZ
                                                 ^ <L>
                       PQ                         *> W>                 d
                       O                         »8 0                   o
                       o                         ^ co
                                                 w u
                       <N                                               03
                                                  o' 4>
                                                                        bfl
                                                  <0
                                                          d
                                                  £ tD                  4)
                                     a>           s
                                                  i-J                   >
                                    x3                   /*■—S
                                                                        d

                                                 O co
                                                     . ON              d-
                                                 y-'-N M
                                                  o ^                  vo
                                    x^                                  ON
                                     o3           d"
                                                  ON -4
                                                       .

                                     d
                                     4>
                                     3           So
                                     cr
                                     d>
                                     CO
                                                 T3 t£
                                     X)                      ay
                                         3       X -0
                                                 HH cO
                        bo
                       .a
                                                 •a s
                                                   o3
                                                                  a o
                                                  o               ftffi
                       44            ■S                           d 6
                        o3                        K               4>       O
                        co
                       *d
                                      3                           9PcH
                                                  jg «.§
                                                   o K d4)
                                                              p
                                                              b0 &.§f
                                                  WhUft
                        u
                        4> ,
                        >                          <3 -O
                       *S'
500   Part IV Animals      RYDER


length of the fleece7. The mean fibre diameter was 34'6/x and there was a
skewed-to-fine distribution, but there was a continuous range in fibre
diameter from 12 to 110^-x making it comparable with a hairy sheep (see below)
rather than a kempy sheep, which has a discontinuous diameter distribution
(see Mouflon in Fig. 2).
   Most of the major variations in sheep, i.e. in the horns, tail length, and the
appearance of a white, woolly type of fleece seem to have taken place by the
time that illustrations and records first appeared in Mesopotamia about 3000
b.c., i.e. during the first half of the period since domestication. This seems to
be an example of the principle that evolution along a new line at first proceeds
rapidly, and then slows down8. In addition, the fact that evolution progresses
more rapidly in smaller populations may have been a contributory factor.
  It is likely that those characters such as colour, and the absence of horns,
which seem to be controlled by relatively few genes, were introduced as a
result of mutations. But most characters of economic importance such as
fleece structure, and fleece weight are controlled by many genes, and show
continuous variation. Thus subsequent changes wrought by man can be
explained as due to a gradual selection of animals with the desired characters,
such as a woollier fleece. Once some divergence had taken place, human
migrations allowed wide out-breeding, and cross-breeding of this sort has
been an important factor in the development of modern breeds.



      Evidence from textile remains

The earliest wool, from textiles, that it has been possible to examine was from
the Bronze Age of northern Europe. The first workers who examined such
wool described it as mixed with deer hair. It is now realized that, at any rate in
most instances, the “deer hairs” are really the kemp fibres found in the fleeces
of primitive sheep. Details of the Bronze Age wool examined are given in
Table 1. The Danish Bronze Age wool from Guldhoj dated 1200 b.c., was
densely pigmented and had an unusual distribution of fibre diameters, which
was unlike any known fleece type9. This had a very high proportion of fine
fibres, and only a few medium and hairy fibres. That this was not a fortuitous
result is shown by the finding of the same unusual diameter distribution in
some Norwegian Bronze Age wool by Rosenqvist10.
  In primitive hand-spinning, the wool is taken direct from the staple, so one
expects the distribution of fibre diameter in the yam to be the same as that in
the fleece. This unexpected distribution was therefore puzzling until moulting
was investigated in the Soay sheep remaining on St. Kilda off north-west
Scotland. Although the fine wool, and some of the hairy fibres, shed in the
spring, many of the hairy fibres remain in the skin to shed later. Sheep that
moult are plucked to obtain their wool, and this retention of the hairy fibres
suggests that the plucking of primitive breeds might yield wool with a
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep    501


greater proportion of fine fibres than would be obtained if the fleece was shorn,
and the hairy fibres included.
   The similarity of sheep bones from excavations with those of the Soay11,
and the similarity of wool in textile remains with the fleece of the Soay12
suggest that the Soay type is a survivor of the prehistoric sheep of Europe.
   Soay fleeces range from a hairy type in which the hairy (outer coat) fibres
are fine kemps, to a woolly type in which the outer coat fibres are of only
medium diameter (Fig. 2). These probably correspond to the two types that
have been described in textile specimens as hairy medium, and generalized
medium, wool13. Irrespective of the extent of hairiness there are also dark and
light brown types of Soay14. Dark, hairy animals more closely resemble the
wild Mouflon, and are possibly the most primitive, while light, woolly
animals may be the least primitive. The coat length is comparable to that in
the Mouflon, being about 5 cm., and longer in hairy than woolly animals.
   This range of fleece type in a single population indicates that a similar
variation could have existed within flocks in the past. Thus the finding of
different fleece types in textiles from a particular site could indicate a range of
variation rather than the existence of distinct breeds.



      Evidence from skin

By the Iron Age in the West, and probably before in the Near East, much
wool was white, and a specimen from central Asia dated about 400 B.c.
comprised a complete sheepskin with the wool intact15. This came from a
Scythian burial at Pazirik in the Altai Mountains, and is of interest in having
an outer coat of hairs instead of the kemps or medium fibres found in the Soay
(PI. vi a and Table 2). So far only two types of fibre, kemp and wool, have
been mentioned, but some modern breeds have a third fibre type, long hairs.
These are also known as heterotype hairs because they are intermediate in
character between kemp and wool. They are coarse and kemp-like in summer,
but in winter hairs grow thinner, and appear like true wool fibres: when
kemps cease growing preparatory to shedding, hairs merely thin down and
continue to grow.
  The hairs of the Pazirik sample were longer and finer than kemps, but were
unusual in showing evidence of shedding in the skin. They may represent a
stage of evolution towards the much longer and usually continuously growing
heterotype hairs found in the fleeces of modern hairy hill sheep such as the
Scottish Blackface. Such fleeces have been thought of as being primitive, but
having this specialized type of hair fibre, they are apparently highly evolved.
  The origin of hairs would seem to be associated in some way with the
change from a moulting fleece to one of continuous growth. Whether man
began to select against moulting before or after starting to clip the wool is not
502   Part IV Animals   RYDER



                          8 s
                         4* £     *c3          cfl
                                  A           dJ

                                   <D
                                   a
                                  <a          £
                            3
                                 T3<D
                                              T3<D
                                 <D£          £<L>
                                   C/3        ■a
                                   o
                                  t>
                            o    <#            N
                                               (N
                                  N




                                                     o
                                         (N          O
                                       % OO          M
                           bo     6 I O I
                                  7 N op v£)
                        § ^        I
                                  (N
                                         VO
                                              O
                                               I     Qn

                                  m           <N
                        g*

                                              *
                                              6CJ
                                              m

                                              <u
                                              do
                          .fcb                d

                                              u
                                              PQ

                          a                   O
                                              o
                          Q                vn
                                 43 w    m oX




                                 <
                                 73u
                          co      d           d
                                  D           <                   Jh
                                 U                              Oj
                                                                w
                                  N           73                  o
                                  Oj
                                 Ph           SC
                                                                  a
                                              OJ                  <u
                                              d
                                              d
                                              <L>
                                                                 <u
                                                                 Sh
                                              >                  2
                                                                 oo
                                               s                 aJ
                                                                 <D
                                   So         gcn
                           sto
                                  o<D          d                <U
                          Co
                                   ctf        s                 £
                                 dj
                                              E?
                                              O                 K
                                                          X
                                                          <l>
                                                                ****»
                                                                •<5
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep   503


known, but it is thought that shears were invented in the Near East about
1000 B.C.

   In order to investigate the possibility that heterotypes had originated by
crossing a woolly with a kempy sheep, some Merino sheep were crossed with a
Mouflon, but the offspring had kemp and wool like the Mouflon parent16.
   The Pazirik specimen introduces the skin as a new source of evidence, and
fibre length as a new dimension. Textile specimens, although readily studied,
provide only fibre diameter values; it would be virtually impossible to obtain
measurements of fibre length from them. The wool fibres on the Pazirik skin
were 8 cm. long, and the hairs extended to 12 cm. That this was the maximum
length was shown by observing in sections of the skin that the fibres had
“brush ends” i.e. they had ceased to grow. This length of coat is longer than
that of the wild sheep, or the Soay, but is comparable with only the shortest
hairy fleeces of today. A sheepskin from the Iron Age Hallstatt salt workings
in Austria had brush ends in the skin, but the length of 3 cm. seems too short
to be the maximum coat length, and so this had probably become shortened
through fibre breakage. The coarse fibres of this specimen appeared to be
kemps rather than hairs (Table 2). The way in which fibre length can alter the
appearance and nature of the coat was shown with some goats by Ryder17.
Most goats have a short woolly undercoat obscured by a kempy outercoat,
and when such animals were crossed with an Angora goat (the source of
mohair) the progeny grew long wool, like that of the Angora parent, which
completely obscured the kemp.
  But if remains of woolled sheepskins are rare, remains of skin in the form
of leather and parchment are not, and these frequently contain fibre remains
that can not only provide measurements of fibre diameter, but give different
evidence from the way in which they are arranged in the skin18.
  The outer coat hairs are formed first in the foetus, and are known as
primary fibres. The fibres of the underwool are formed later and are known as
secondaries. In most mammals the fibres are not distributed at random in the
skin, but are arranged in characteristic groups. Primary fibres he in rows of
three, and the smaller but more numerous secondaries are grouped on one
side of them so that each fibre group, which is the smallest unit of the
coat, consists of a trio of outer coat primaries with their associated finer
secondaries.
  In the wild sheep (Fig. 3a) there is a tendency for the secondary fibres to lie
between the primaries. The kempy sheep of the tropics, and the goat, have a
similar grouping, but the secondaries have begun to move from between the
primaries. The remaining three groups in Fig. 3 were found in parchment
from the Dead Sea Scrolls19. The group shown in Fig. 3b is from a hairy sheep
comparable with the Pazirik animal, but only a few were of this type. Most
had a grouping like that in 3 c which corresponds to the generalized medium
wool type found in the Soay, but the Dead Sea samples had no pigment.
504   Part IV Animals      RYDER


                                            o
                                                                  o
                                          o°-                     o 0
                                          oo
                                           o                      ao J00 o
                                         o                                 o
                                                                    o        o °o
                                                                o     c °o O
                                                                 a o
                                                                           o O oO
                                                                       o 0  00
                                             O O                         9 <*
                                                                       ■'O

                                                                         %
                                                                    '.V-'     ° s* O
                                             o                      oo° O0 ®
                                                                 o     o o o o9 O
                                              o
                                               o                            O aaO
                                                O
                                                               OO
                                          *1.                  °o      0

Fig 3 Wool fibre groupings in the skin (a) in wild sheep, (b), (c), (d) in parch¬
      ment from the Dead Sea Scrolls; (b) hairy sheep; (c) generalized
      medium wool; (d) fine-woolled sheep.
      (from Ryder, M. L. (1962). The histological examination of skin in the study
      of the domestication of sheep, Z. Tierziicht. ZuchtBiol., 77, pp. 168-71.)


There were two specimens of true fine-woolled type (3d) which is interesting
because it showed that a possible ancestor of the modem fine-woolled Merino
breed was in existence in the Near East about 2000 years ago.
  The evolutionary trend in the wool fibre groups of domestic sheep therefore
seems to have been a movement of the secondaries from between the
primaries, accompanied by a tendency for the primary fibres to become less
hairy, and then finer. As more secondaries have developed in finer-woolled
types, these have spread away from the primaries. Thus fleece type can be
inferred from the type of fibre grouping in the skin from the relative sizes of
the primary and secondary fibres, and from the relative number of secondary
fibres in the group, i.e. the S/P ratio20. There is too little evidence as yet to
enable one to associate these changes with distinct areas of the Near East and
particular dates as attempted by Flannery21.



      The generalized medium wool (ancient fine wool) as
      an evolutionary link

Some samples of leather from water skins found in the Cave of the Letters
near the Dead Sea by Yadin22 and dated second century a.d. gave results
similar to those from the Dead Sea Scrolls, viz. they were predominantly from
a generalized medium wool sheep23. But some pieces of dyed cloth with the
leather were of immense interest because to the naked eye they were appar¬
ently made of fine wool. This wool would therefore seem to be the ancient
fine wool to which classical writers refer. A microscopic examination gave a
different result, however, which made all the earlier findings fall into place
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep    505


Under the microscope, in addition to the fine fibres, there was seen to be a
proportion amounting to about 15% which were of medium diameter (Fig. 4).
 This wool, which was white, therefore corresponded to the generalized
medium type (Fig. 3c) which predominated in the parchment from the Dead
Sea Scrolls, and was not a true fine type (Fig. 3d) as suspected from the
examination by naked eye.




Fig 4 Distribution of fibre diameters in unspun wool from cave near Dead Sea
      dated second century a.d.
      (from Ryder, M. L. (1964). Fleece evolution in domestic sheep, Nature, Lojid.
      204, pp. 555-9-)


  This type has apparently been important in fleece evolution. The name
“generalized medium wool” derives from the fact that the fleece appears to be
in an intermediate position, providing a probable evolutionary link between
more primitive kempy or hairy types, and several of the more highly evolved
fleeces of today.
   It could have evolved from a more primitive type by a narrowing of kemps
or hairs to produce medium fibres. The generalized medium type could in
turn have given rise to the true fine wool by a further narrowing of the
medium fibres so that the fleece contained only fine fibres (Figs. 2 and 5).
And in fact, as mentioned above, a few parchments from the Dead Sea
Scrolls show that this had already taken place, at least in some sheep, about
2000 years ago.
506        Part IV Animals     RYDER


   If on the other hand selective breeding had caused the finer fibres to
become coarser, then a diameter distribution comparable with that of
the modern longwool would have been obtained. Thirdly, if the range of
fibre diameter had become shortened to give a more symmetrical distribu¬
tion, with a mean diameter between the fine and medium values, the distri¬
bution would be comparable with that of the modern shortwool (Figs. 2 and
5). The existence of this generalized type as a possible common ancestor of
the longwool on the one hand, and the shortwool on the other, makes it un¬
likely that the shortwool was derived from the longwool as was suggested on
biological grounds by Fraser and Hamada24 or that the longwool was derived
from the shortwool as suggested from historical evidence by Bowden25.
   Some samples of the Roman period from Murrabaat near the Dead Sea,
and others of a similar date from Daliyeh, ten miles north of Jericho, supplied
by Miss E. M. Crowfoot confirmed the above findings28. The measurements
have been detailed in Tables 3 and 4 to show the range of variation. Of the
twenty-four yarns from Murrabaat, nine were typical of the generalized



  No.        Range              Mean   Mode    Distribution      Fleece Type

40(b)         8-30               20     18    symmetrical      true fine
41 (b)       12-34               19     18    skew-fine        true fine
40(a)        12-36               21     16    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
41 (a)       10-34               23     22    symmetrical      fine/gen. medium
               1 of 40
43 c (b)     10-38               20     18    symmetrical      true fine
42b (b)      12-40               22     l6    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
45 (b)       12-40               22     18    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
48 (a)       12-40               22     20    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
48 (b)       10-40               21    17     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
43d (b)       8-42               20    20     symmetrical      true fine
47a (b)      12-42               23    20     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
62 (b)       12-42               21    18     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
50b (b)      10-44               22    18     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
62 (a)       10-44               22    18     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
                1 of 48
42b (a)      10-46               24    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
43c (a)      12-46               21    16     skew-fine        gen. medium
43 d (a)     10-46               23    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
                I of 52
42a (b)      10-48               22    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
47a (a)      14-48               22    18     skew-fine        gen. medium
                50 & 52
50b (a)      12-50 (slight      24     20     skew-fine        gen. medium
               pigmentation)
44f (a)       8-50               28    22     symmetrical      gen. med./medium
               2 of 54
45 (a)       10-52               23    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
44f(b)       10-52               25    16     skew-fine        gen. medium
                1 of 56
42a (a)      10-54               25     18    skew-fine        gen. medium


Table 3 Wool fibre diameter measurements in          yarns    from   Murrabaat
     (microns).
                               Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep       507


medium wool, but one medium sample had a symmetrical distribution and so
could represent the evolution towards the true medium type proposed above.
Four yarns were of true fine type, and ten, although having a skewed-to\fine
distribution like the generalized medium wool, were finer and perhaps inter¬
mediate between the generalized medium and fine types. It is possible,
however, that these were generalized medium wools that had become finer
owing to poor nutrition.



  No.          Range        Mean      Mode      Distribution       Fleece Type

No. 4         10-24          16        16      symmetrical      true fine
A. (b)        10-26          17        16      symmetrical      true fine
C. (a)        10-36          19        16      symmetrical      true fine
18(d)         12-32          19        l6      symmetrical      true fine
No. 6         12-32          21        20      symmetrical      true fine
D. (b)        12-34          22        22      symmetrical      true fine
No. 2         12-36          24        22      symmetrical      true fine
A. (a)        10-32          22        20      symmetrical      true fine
                1 of 40
B. (b)        14-34          21        20      skew fine        fine/gen. medium
                3 of 40
II (2) (b)    12-46          23        20      skew fine        gen. medium
D. (a)        14-48          25        20      skew fine        gen. medium
B. (a)        14-46          27        24      skew fine        gen. medium
                3 of 50
II (1) (a)    10-42          23        20      skew fine        gen. medium
                2 of 52
II (2) (a)    12-42          21        l6      skew fine        gen. medium
                I of 54
18            12-40          24        22      skew fine        gen. medium
                56 & 58
II (1) (b)    12-48          21        16      skew fine        hairy medium
                54 & 80
C.(b)         12-46          27      22 & 28   symmetrical      gen. med./medium
                1 of 50
Z weft        14-50          33        30      symmetrical      shortwool
tent (b)      12-140         36        20      continuous       hairy



Table 4 Wool fibre diameter measurements in yams from Daliyeh (microns).


     In contrast, eight of the yams from Daliyeh were of true fine type, and
only one was a fine generalized medium wool. If, as is suggested, some of the
fine yarns (Nos. 2, 4 and 6) in fact date back to the fourth century b.c., then
the origin of the true fine wool can be pushed back several centuries. Five of
the Daliyeh yarns were generalized medium wool, and one was of the hairy
medium type, which is more common on sites in northern Europe. There was
again one possible true medium type, and also one shortwool. These types are
somewhat unexpected in this region because they became predominant later
in Britain, but there is no reason why they should not have evolved in¬
dependently in other areas. Finally, one yarn from a tent was of hairy type
(the other tent yams being camel hair). This suggested that three samples of
508   Part IV Animals                             ryder



                                                       E
                                                       3
                                                                                        6
                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                a3 a3 a3 a3
                                                                                       *3                                  *3 y. *8             X3 X) T3 T3
         3                                      §11                                     <u                                 <U 2h d>             <L>   d>    d>    <L>
                        •2 ^ i
                        "O XJ *ri
                         K U XI        XJ       I fi                                    6• 3<L)|!
                                                                                               X3 X3
                                                                                                                           a a e                a a a a
                      • J <L>
                               E S
                                       d>                                              G d d> <L>          ri g c                               cede
                    6 6                E                                               (U G E G
                                                                                       bfl^c C
                                                                                                           <3 Si <u
                                                                                                           M •J® t>o
                                                                                                                                                d>    d>
                                                                                                                                                be be be be
                                                                                                                                                            d>    <U

                    >, >>
                 <u . E J> <u u <L> d) G w                                             <lT .E c   <L> <L> <u     dT                              d> d> dT
                 G *C0 c3      C3      v G                                             fl cd o             G
                <G X! rG      rG 5        4h                                           2 »G W) bo         cG                                    «§ «S
                 d>     d>    d>
           e     G G
           o
         ■ •—
                <G <G
          3      o o CJ
                    +-•              H ’G        d>    d) ’C! w d>                     d)    d)     d>     d>   d           J   d)   d)   ‘C    d>    d>    d)
         -o
         ’C
                  i  1  1           ■M *-*
                                                       d
                                                           4—<             G            G                                                        G          G
                T3 XJ Gd
                 d> d) d)
                                     d> d»
                                                «§
                                                           dl
                                                               !<§ cG                  cG                       OJ                        d)
                                                                                                                                                «G    cS cG
                 d>     d>    d)
                                    s     g
                                          G   &
                                              d> d)              !   d>    d>           d>    <D  d) o
                                                                                                      &         g           i   & & 5
                                                                                                                            J d> d>          OJ d>
                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                                   OJ
                ZZ                        pA zz ZZ                                           ZZ zz ZZ           tn          4 zz zz       >3^4 Z4 Z4
                        C/3   00    C/D   C/3 C/3          (Z1       C/3   C/3         C/3    C/D C/D C/D       C/3         0 C/3 C/D     C/D   C/3         C/D


                00            O     o vo        G- G 00              O     N           00    o <N o O                       d o o               00 VO O
                                                                                                                                                 ►-4 M M
          o             HH    <S    m           H-4 H4 i             (N    •“4          ►H   (N     (S          (S          S   (S   (S




          R
          G     vO      N nq m r- n 00 oo m                                                  r*^ vo   oq o\ fO ON G*                            G vq rn
          d>
         V-<    6       M m OO VO  CO     6 d-                                         <N    o »/q <N on 6 (N (N 6                              On 00       ON rn
                (S      (S <N (S M M l>
                                      M M (S                                           <N    <N            fS   M     (S   <N   (N   (S             M          (N

                                                                                              O
                                                                                             vo
          d)                                                                                 T3
          §P            o n                                  .
                                                                                              G
                                                                                              CS
          Q             i> o                     o          q.                                (N
                         C/D 00                 00
                                                            O                    d-           oq
                        .*3 tu                   (-4        d"
          ?»-                                                                                 C/3
                         2 "G                   •1         4-4
          <N>           GJ ^                                                                 .G
          *«»                                   »G          O                    VO           G
                   N w                      ro   MrC        M
          Q      o G VO o O VO     (N VO rs 4-* O o       G* N N O G" 00                                                                        VO 00 oo          O
                m m rn vq m m m nq vq oq
                                            03
                                                d* -1- G- G* m m G- G- m                                                                        m m rtq G-
                                    I 1
                vo A <n (S i A N1 00 00 vo1                      1
         q       l       I                  HH                         l                                                                             1 1
                                                A A A 4 A A G- 4 N                                                                              A A <N (S



                                                                                        X X X X                            XXX                  X
                    I    | X X I                       x X X                            X X X X I                     I    I I I                I            I     I
                 ca jd rtjo                                                                                                          :(         3 « 3 a
                                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                       Co            (2)
                                                           O                                                               vo                         i/q
                                                                                                                <N          N        m                m           o

                                                           m                           4-i
                                                                                       G3  c3                   6          o         o                o
                                                                                                                                                                  z
                                                           6
                                                                                        03 S
                                                                                           3                    z          z         z                z           o
                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                           <                           4-* +-»




                                                                                 rC
                                                                                  *J
                §                                                                 o
                                                T3                               T>                 ;>>         ^
                §
                cj _ 'S<u                                                         <D
         &0                               ^  §                                    G c
                                          Jh ^
                                          2 o
                                                           Z4                     G d>
                111
                « « w
                                                           l-l
                                                           o                      S G               <u          rG
                                          i COu                            C?          c*                       u
                m             Z           Gh               f*
                                                                           1|*
                                                                                                    O           CO
                              O
                              00

                                          "3-                              1>2
                              <           <                                W
                                                                           v-^' &
                <                         Pd                               C/3   fl
                P-4                                        £               a  s
                              go          ♦-J                              X) >>
                                                                           03 OJ
                                                                                                                N
                 o
                 u            u           o
                                           o               G               5s                                   c
                CO            CO          CO               G                                                    ‘G
          3§                  a3          a3               £               CO
         Co     uC/3
                                          <u
                                          c/D
                 G                        G                2
                S                         S                §
                3                                          Ph*
                 G                        S3
                .O            w           ,VJ OJ
                *->03         4-»
                              03          '<j
                                           03 G>,
                                                                                                    <u
                                                                                                    XJ
                                                                                                    ^3
                z             Z           Z PC                                                                  Q
                                                        Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep                                       509




fine/gen. medium




fine                   fine
                                                               g
                                                                     CO    CO    CO
                                                               MX! X! X


skew fine                                                                                                                    VO
                                                                                                                              I


                       skew fine/
                                      <U (U              u u <u <u <u
                                      G G
skew fine/                            X X                gcgcgcgcg                                                           N
                                      Si<U £  £          a & £ & £                                                           a
symmetrical
                                                         P<3J<U<U<U
                                           <U_
                                    >>44 44 44
                                                 <L>
                                                         ^44 44 44 44                                                        a
                                                         C/3   C/3   C/3   C/D   C/3
                                                                                                                             to
20                                                                                                                           VO
20                      18            00     o
                                      m (N N N   O       00
                                                          <N
                                                               o
                                                               (S
                                                                     00
                                                                     h
                                                                           o
                                                                           (S
                                                                                 N
                                                                                 (N



                                                                                               C/3   00    c/D   co
                                                                                               G G         G C
                                                                                               O O
                                                                                                 »-< O O
                                                                                                 o
207                                                                                            '§ 6 G G
                       212
                                             VP Ov       \0 h romh
                                                                                                           VO N               o
                                                                                                            ►h r)
                                      ov Tt- ^ vp         r-vo G- r- ^ tj-vo
20 4                                  M(S(N(S             (SN(S(N<Nc/3N»h
                                                                                                                             GQ
                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                             <u
                                                 o                                                   4-J


12-30 plus I of 44
                                                                     3.                              cd
                                                                    00   3.                          <u
                                                          3.     3. vp vO
                                                                         O       C/3                 H
                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                 C/3    .X
                                                          0      O C/3           G                               G
                                                         VO     VO _J-< u        O                   O           O
                                                 CO      J-t     u e3 cd         lx
                                                                                 (j
                                                                                                     CO          Ih
                                                                                                                 U     >0  3
                                                                                                                       v-> CO
                                           j3            *cd     cd 43  43
                                           'a            43     43 <N M G 6
                                                                            'cd                      0
                                                                                                     G           G     ^ C


14-34
                                       N O VO O           <N VO N VO 0-1               cr                              d_&
                       14-36
                                                                                 0                   <u
                                       m t}- op vp        VP Tt VP Tt- VP CO MD                      00          N     ao
                                                                      1  1                                              r> J-H
                                       (S N N O           M M    O <N Tf        VO
                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                 i<s       CJ4
                                                                         M             5             2~-
                                                                                                                       M ‘3
                                                                                                                        . X
                                                                                                                       §h
                                                                                                                       p-c
                        -               I    I   X X      X     X    X     X     X                                     7 £
  (b) -                                                                                43 ^                W
                                      ^ S' ^ S'                                                                        5N
                        weft
                                                          o     03    m    ojG

warp -                                                                                 id      g
                                                                                       O       g                       a1"1
                                                                                       43                              <U
                                                                                       +-> t3                          <u
                                                                                                                       43           <u
                                                                                       2 G
                                                                                       M (N                                         G
                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                        G                                          PC
                                                                                        <u
                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                       o O „
                                                  VP           vO
                                                                                                                       X > T3
                                                                                                                              ^ G
                                                  t—t                <W                                                       <u N
                                                  I                                                                          43 w


           (Germany)
                                                                 I    W     M
                                                  r-            t- | 1
                                       sG         l              l <S N
                                                                      M     M                                                       5
                                                  0             Add
                                                                 vp vp                                                             £
                                      0           On            Ov On Ov
                                                                                                                       V.     0
                                                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                                       ?-> CL .

                                                                                                                       33    (2 J
                                       00
                                       H                           G G
                                                                                       “o
                                       G          N             N O O                  4cd-J
                                                                                        C/3                              •    VP    vu
                                                                                                                                   ^3
                                                                     ”25 3
           Mainz
                                      43         .s            .S
                                                                     T
                                                                      fH
                                                                      Ul                0
                                                                                                                       rj-VO
                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                       vVO fx'
                                                                                                                            n        #
                                                                cd
                                       Id
                                        cd
                                                 *cd                  O                43                              S'-^'o
                                       C/D       S                   hJ                 H                              W . vp
                                                                                        s
                                                                                       <u
                                                                                       z
                                                                                       4x
                                                  G                                     0
                                                   G                                    00                              u u
                                                  <U
                                                  C/3                                   c                               <u o G
                                                   G                                   "G                              •G *d o>
                                                                                         <u
                                                 2                                       >                             PC pc P
                                                                                         o
                                                                                         o                             —n         s s~s
                                                                                                                        <3 -O VJ
                                                 *c                                    3
                                                 m                                     3J
5io   Part IV Animals    RYDER


leather which were from hairy animals were in fact from hairy sheep and not
from goats.
   The generalized medium wool is probably the same as the fine-woolled
sheep referred to in Roman records, which apparently originated in the Near
East, and spread around the Mediterranean27. It may have been brought to
northern Europe by the Romans.
  Table 5 summarizes the findings from European textiles of the Roman
period, and these in general accord with the results from the Near East
(above). Of thirty yarns examined five were of true fine type, and eleven were
fine generalized medium wools. There were only four typical generalized
medium wools, but seven of hairy medium type. Again evolution towards the
true medium (two yams) and the shortwool (one yarn) had occurred.
  The remainder of the first millennium a.d. is represented in the Mediter¬
ranean region by Coptic and other textiles from North Africa. Although these
were of the same general type as the earlier wools from the Near East, they
were appreciably hairier, and some yarns from Tripoli dated about A.D. 1000
had natural pigmentation like wools of similar date from northern Europe.
The measurements are summarized in Table 6 from which it can be seen that
there was only one relatively fine type, and seven generalized medium wools,
but there were seven of hairy medium type and two hairy ones.
  Wools of similar date from northern Europe similarly had more hairy
representatives, and even more pigment than during the Roman period
(Table 7). There were fifteen hairy medium wools, ten generalized medium
wools and one of true medium type. There were only three intermediate fine
wools, but as many as nine of true fine type, which came mainly from English
Saxon sites.
  The mediaeval period in North Africa is represented by twenty-four yarns
from Nubia supplied by Miss E. Crowfoot. These came from burials at
Qasr Ibrim dated tenth to fourteenth century, excavated by Prof. J.
Plumley.
  The generalized medium type predominated with nine examples and there
were six of hairy medium type. Two more hairy specimens had a mean
diameter and distribution more in keeping with the true hairy type. There
were two yams comparable with the shortwool of northern Europe, and two
of fine to generalized medium type, but only three true fine wools. Only three
specimens, three hairy medium wools and one fine to generalized medium
wool, had natural pigmentation (Table 6a).



      British breeds of sheep

The main type of sheep in Britain before the Roman occupation was probably
brown and of Soay type. Historical evidence suggests that the Romans
introduced a white sheep with a finer fleece. Textile evidence summarized
                                     Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep   511


above supports this conclusion, and suggests that the sheep was basically of
generalized medium type.
     It is possible that crosses between the white, Roman sheep, and the brown,
native Soay produced types that later emerged as breeds such as the Cheviot
of the Scottish Border, and the Welsh Mountain breed. These are (or were)
horned in the males only, any pigment is usually brown, and they remain
today in the northern and western parts of Britain which received least
Roman influence (Fig. 5).
     The Roman generalized medium type could itself have evolved into a
primitive longwool, by the coarsening of the fine fibres, already discussed.


Source           Range                Mean      Mode    Distribution     Fleece Type

Coptic wools in the British Museum
T13 (b)          8-44                   20       20    symmetrical/    fine/gen.
                                                         skew fine        medium
Tio (a)         8-46                    21        14   skew fine       gen. medium
T9 (b)          10-46                   21     16 & 20 skew fine       gen. medium
T8 (b)          8-40                    22        20   skew fine       gen. medium
                  2 of 50, 56
T8              10-30                   19       l6    skew fine       gen. medium
                  2 of 44, 56
Tio (b)         8-42                    22       20    skew fine       hairy medium
                  50,60
T9 (a)          10-44                   22       14    skew fine       hairy medium
                  50, 60
T8 (a)          10-44                   27       20    skew fine        hairy medium
                  3 of 50, 2 of 60
T12 (b)         16-52                   31       20    skew fine        hairy medium
                  2 of 60 & 68, 72
T13 (a)         10-52                   26       20    skew fine       hairy medium
                   58
T12 (a)         10-60                   32       30    continuous      hairy
                  64 & 76

Coptic wools in Halifax Museum
E9-33i           12-54                  25       20    skew fine       gen. medium
                   58
Ec>-329          14-16                  25       22    skew fine       gen. medium
                  50


Ghirza, Tripoli, A.D. 1000
GH41
natural brown
warp            i4-5°                   26       22    skew fine       hairy medium
                56, 60
yellow weft     12-54                   26       24    skew fine       gen. medium
GH45
natural brown
warp          20—64                     37       26    skew fine       hairy medium
GH55
pigmented xxx 8-50
                2 of 58, 60,76          26       22    skew fine       hairy



Table 6 Diameter measurements of North African wools of the first
         millennium A.D. (microns).
512     Part IV Animals        RYDER


The appropriate diameter range has been found in at least one textile from
Britain, and the white-faced, polled, Romney breed, whose original home was
Kent, is an example of a primitive longwool.
 A shortening of the diameter range probably produced the shortwool of
English mediaeval fame, and most mediaeval illustrations show white-faced
polled sheep like that surviving today as the Ryeland breed. Surprisingly,
Romano-British textiles include the true fine type rather than this shortwool,
i.e. the type that would be derived by a shortening of the diameter range28.
The true fine wool, which could have been derived by a narrowing of the
medium fibres emerged in Spain as the modern Merino breed (Fig. 5).
     The third main British sheep is the black-faced horned type. This has a
long hairy fleece, and first appeared in northern and eastern England29. When
it arrived is not known, but it appears to have had an ultimately Asiatic origin,


No.          Pigment   Range              Mean   Mode   Distribution      Fleece Type

36/1 (a)     —          8-24              l6        14   symmetrical   fine
     (b)                8-24              16     14 & 18 symmetrical   fine
                         2 at 30
21b          -         14-34              22       16   skew fine      fine
15c          -         14-38              23       l6   skew fine      fine/gen. medium
15a          XXX       14-36              22       16   skew fine      fine/gen. medium
                         42
2            -         14-40              23       26   skew fine      gen. medium
21a                    16-38              26       27   skew fine      gen. medium
                         50
44                     16-42              28       24   skew fine      gen. medium
             "
                         46
21c                    16-42              28       24   skew fine      gen. medium
             "
                         48
29c          -         14-48              27      24    skew fine      gen. medium
4a           -         16-48              29      24    skew fine      gen. medium
4b           -         14-52              26      20    skew fine      gen. medium
28b          -         14-52              27      18    skew fine      gen. medium
29a          -         14-54              58      20    skew fine      gen. medium
9a           -         14-44              25      24    symmetrical    shortwool
46           -         18-44              27      26    symmetrical    shortwool
18b          XXX       14-66              27      20    skew fine      hairy medium
9b                     16-48              26      24    skew fine      hairy medium
             "
                         60& 86
28a                    16-48              32      28    skew fine      hairy medium
                         60, 62, 66, 68
15b          XXX       16-54              29      20    skew fine      hairy medium
                         76
29d          X         16-52              31            skew fine      hairy medium
                                                  24
                         74
18a                    16-58              30      22    skew fine      hairy medium
                         94
28a                    18-48              32      30    symmetrical    hairy medium/
                         54, 56, 82                                      hairy
29b                    10-64              36      30    symmetrical    hairy medium/
                                                                         hairy


Table 6a Diameter measurements of mediaeval wools from Qasr                       Ibrim
     Nubia (microns).
NEW STONE AGE                                                                             ‘TURBARY*
                                                                                  (only skeletal evidence so far)


                  WO   o
                       O    CQ   o




                  LU
      (U   c*     N         O    LU
                < o <
                   o Z
                            o U4
                               o
                zo   §      *0




                                 O



     LU         04
v>   o     z    3      >*   <    Q
                H




                t
                (W
     iu    $    LU
                </>        I
                                      Fig 5 Suggested lines of evolution of fleece types. The dates given are approximate ones based on the
                                           earliest date for the beginning of each period at the centre of domestication in South-west
                                           Asia, although for instance the Bronze Age fleece evidence comes entirely from Northern
                                           Europe at a later date.
 514          Part IV Animals      RYDER




Source           Pigment   Range           Mean   Mode Distribution    Fleece Type

Germany
Steinfeld
T43 (a)            XX      12-30           166     l6   skew fine     gen. medium
                             I of 50
        (b)        XX      10-34           17-1    l6   skew fine     gen. medium
                             40&48
Schleswig
T33 (a)           XX       14-54           290     30   symmetrical   medium
     (b)          XX       12-30           229     22   skew fine     hairy medium
                             2 of 58, 66
Schleswig
T34 (a)           xxx      14-78           297     22   skew fine     hairy medium
    (b)           xxx      16-48           286     30   symmetrical   hairy medium
                             68, 70, 78
Schleswig
T35 (a)           xxx      14-36           25-0    20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             46, 64 & 76
    (b)           xxx      16-48           285     22   skew fine     gen. medium
Schleswig
T36 (a)           X        14-38           225     20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             i at 60
        (b)       X        14-34           224     20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             some hairs
        (c)       XX       16-44           262     20   skew fine     gen. medium
        (d)       XX       14-46           262     26   symmetrical   shortwool
        (e)       xxx      18-42           285     20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             54, 58, 64
Netherland varves
T37 (a)       XX           14-58           290     24   skew fine     hairy medium
Groningen                    62,76, 80
    (b)       XXX          14-52           257     26   symmetrical   hairy medium
Ezinge                       66 & 80
T38 (a)       XX           10-26           181     20   symmetrical   fine
    (b)       XX            8-34           186     18   symmetrical   fine
Leens
T39 (a)       xxx          14-62           334    22    skew fine     hairy medium
    (b)      xxx           12-46           24 6   20    skew fine     hairy medium
                             52, 54) 76
Leens
T40 (a)           xxx      12-58           277    22    skew fine     hairy medium
                             1 of 64
        (b)       xxx      12-52           266    20    skew fine     hairy medium
                              1 of 70
Leens
T41 (a)           xxx      14-44           217     18   skew fine     gen. medium
                             50&56
        (b)       xxx      14-58           24-1    18   skew fine     hairy medium
                             64, 66, 78
Norway (Saetrang)
P20 skin     xxx           10-42           214    20    skew fine     gen. medium
      hair   xxx           12-50           27-1   20    skew fine     gen. medium
England (Saxon sites)
Combe, Kent
1 (a)                      12-44           21      16   skew fine     gen. medium
                             50-56
  (b)             -
                            8-44           21      18   skew fine     gen. medium
2 (a)             XX        8-44           22      16   skew fine     hairy medium
                             64
  CM              XX       10-46           22      16   skew fine     gen. medium
                                 Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep     515

Table 7 (cont.)



Source       Pigment   Range          Mean    Mode Distribution    Fleece Type


Broomfield Barrow
Bi (a)       XX        10-34           20      18   symmetrical   fine
   (b)       XX        12-34           22      22   symmetrical   fine
                         44
B3 (a)            XX    8-38           18      14   skew fine     fine/gen. medium
                         44
   (b)            —
                       10-28           18      18   symmetrical   fine
B4 pile           -    10-32           17      16   symmetrical   fine
Sutton Hoo
SHi (a)           _     8-38                   10   skew fine     fine
                                       15
     (b)          -     8-32           l6      13   skew fine     fine
SH2 (a)           -     8-36           17      16   skew fine     fine/gen. medium
                         40,42
   (b)            _    10-38           18      18   skew fine     fine
SH10 pile         ~    10-40           20      20   skew fine     fine/gen. medium



Table 7 Diameter measurements of northern European wools dating from
     A.D. 300 to 900 (microns).



possibly going back to the Pazirik sheep already discussed, and there are
similar breeds on the continent, notably the Heidsnucke of Germany30.
   The relative fineness of Saxon wools has already been mentioned. Although
mediaeval wools examined from Scotland were fine, earlier (Viking) and later
wools from Scotland tended to be hairy31. It has been possible to examine
surprisingly few mediaeval wools, and with progressively later date one is less
certain of local manufacture. Nahlik32 studied many textiles from Novgorod
in Russia dating from the tenth to the fifteenth centuries, and one can see
from his figures that all types from true fine to very coarse fleeces are repre¬
sented, but he acknowledges the difficulty of deciding which were local cloths,
and which were imported.
  Evidence from various sources allows the following tentative suggestions to
be made regarding the fleece types of European sheep. The first wave of
sheep to spread through Europe were probably of Soay type, and in addition
to the Soay itself remaining on the very edge of the continent its influence
apparently remains in the Scandinavian “northern short-tailed” breeds (in¬
cluding the Orkney and Shetland sheep in Britain) which have a range of
colours (black, grey and white) with relatively few brown animals33. The
Roman fine-woolled sheep was apparently a big influence in western Europe,
and the black-faced, hairy, Asiatic type is another main type, but with which
Asiatic invasion it entered Europe is as yet unknown. Investigation of more
material, particularly from south-eastern Europe, may help to fill-in the
details of this sketchy framework.
  The three main biological problems in fleece evolution that remain to be
solved are, first, what changes took place dining the several thousand years
516   Part IV Animals     rydek


between domestication and the earliest (Bronze Age) wool samples examined ?
Neolithic samples are needed to investigate this question.
  Second, how did the long, continuously-growing heterotype hair originate ?
The occurrence of a hairy fleece (the N-type) in the New Zealand Romney
provides a similar problem, but this has usually been thought of as a “throw¬
back” rather than a new mutation34. Further Asiatic samples of similar date to
the Pazirik skin may provide a range of types that might help to elucidate this
change.
  Thirdly, what was the origin of the long, lustrous, coarse but non-medul-
lated fibres of the longwool ? The diameter changes that seem to lead towards
the lustrous longwool fleece, which apparently emerged in its present form in
England in the seventeenth century, have been discussed in the present
account, but the type of specimen available precludes length measurements.
A mutation may well have been important in this change, a similar mutation
having been described in the Merino breed35.



      The coat of cattle

The coat of cattle presents a more difficult problem than that of sheep be¬
cause wild cattle are now extinct, and far less is known about variation in the
coat of modern cattle than in the fleeces of sheep. In addition, the relative
wealth of material from wool textiles is lacking, the main source of material
being leather, and this has fewer hair remains even than parchment. It is clear,
however, that the variation is less in cattle, presumably because the coat has
undergone little or no selection.
  All the hairs of cattle are in fact comparable with the primary fibres of
sheep, and they are distributed at random in the skin, and not in groups as in
sheep. Roman and mediaeval leather examined indicated a coat similar to that
of modern cattle. Where hairs remained, the density of pigment granules
could be discerned, but not the actual colour. Those examined had little
pigmentation (at least in the area from which the skin had come) being
either grey or dun.
  The first difference from what was obviously cattle skin was found in a
fragment of skin from a neolithic bow from Meare, Somerset, dated 2600
b.c. This had hairs, which, although apparently bovine, were much finer than
those of modern cattle36. Bronze Age burials have yielded other bovine hair
samples because human bodies were often buried in a skin37, and where this
has decayed excavators have sometimes been able to retrieve the hairs. Some
of these examined have been similar to those of the modern ox, whereas
another group found in Scotland were finer like the Meare sample (Table 8).
  The identity of this bovine animal is puzzling. It has a skewed-to-fine
distribution of fibre diameter, and an asymmetric distribution of pigment
within the hair, which are characteristics found in the bison. But the bison is
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep    517


thought to have died out in Britain before the land bridge with the continent
was broken. The wild ox (Bos primigenius), a cousin of the bison, on the other
hand is known from skeletal remains to have persisted until the Bronze Age38,
and so it is possible that this unidentified bovine with finer hair was in fact the
wild ox.
  It may be therefore that, in contrast to sheep, which have clearly been
selected for fine wool, the change following domestication in cattle has been
towards hairiness. The mean diameter of cattle hair from ancient and modern
samples including that from the supposedly primitive Highland cattle, falls
within the range 35 to 50^ (Table 8). This range is supported by unpublished
measurements made on a number of British breeds by Dr. D. McEwan
Jenkinson, who did find, however, that the few Galloway cattle investigated
had a mean hair diameter of about 30/x, which could possibly indicate a
primitive status for this breed. The Walcheren, King Fergus Isle and
Chillingham samples, are, on the other hand much coarser than the normal
cattle range (Table 8).
  But until more evidence becomes available, the possibility that these
unidentified ancient specimens are wild cattle must remain a tentative
suggestion, and their true identity must remain a mystery.



      Appendix

     Methods and criteria on which fleece type is decided


The method of examining skin is a modification of the normal histological
technique39. Wool fibres are examined in whole mount, and the diameter of
100 fibres from each sample is measured using a projection microscope at a
magnification of 500 X.
 The criteria on which fleece type is decided have evolved as more and more
samples have been examined, and are based on the measurements found in
modern breeds. Although the mean diameter, and the diameter distribution
are taken into account, the upper limit of the diameter range is the deciding
factor (see Fig. 2). Thus a fleece with a symmetrical (statistically normal)
distribution, and a maximum fibre diameter between 30 and 40/x (one p
(micron) = o-ooi mm.) would be regarded as a true fine type. The shortwool,
too, has a symmetrical diameter distribution, but has a mean diameter of about
25/x compared with a mean of about 20/x in the fine wool. A skewed-to-fine
diameter distribution appears to be a primitive feature and if this occurred in a
fleece with an upper limit above 35^, it would be regarded as a fine variety of
the generalized medium wool (i.e. fine/generalized medium wool).
  The generalized medium wool is characterized by a skewed-to-fine distri¬
bution, and a maximum diameter about 55/u The true medium wool has a
symmetrical diameter distribution with an upper limit of about 60/x, whereas
518   Part IV Animals      RYDER



                                                                   c3
                                                                   £
                                                                   u
                                                                   O
                     3
                    -C>
                                                                   CO
                                                                   3           3
                                                                   O           O
                                                                   3           3
                                                                   3
                                                                              .a*4-J
                                                             a g a
                                                         t>, o B o
                                                                               3
                                                                               O
                                                         S' u <3 cj            cj


                                                         >o O      vo          On
                                                         m 3-                  O




                               3"          00      (S    Tf O                 NO
                               o      o    O M           <N vo                00
                  s §                      *-< M         M   W
                  •2 *         I
                              CO
                                      rN   4 4           4 4       ooi         I
                                                                               Tf
                                                                   (N




                              45 -3 <L>      .. X                  XI         -3
                               o u t3      1>      CJ              u           CJ
                               3 3 0       V. 3                    3           3
                               6 6 6                               6           a



                    £


                    Q




                    co
                               3 £3   C X-
                               u 3 .2 d g
                                M b u S X
                               J2 3 cd <u o
                               SmKOU

                                           VO
                                           VO                      xi
                                                                    CJ
                                           a                        CO
                                           w                       '3)
                                           T3 "d                               T>
                                             3 3                   ’o           3
                                             a               3                  Ctf
                                           7j Tj             <L>   N            4->
                     u                       o o                          O
                     ?*.                     u cj                   3     cj
                     3                     CO CO                    <D   CO
                     O                                              <D
                    CO                       a3 a3           <u
                                                                   Hh u g
                                                                       5 3
                                             <u <u                       co      <U
                                             CO    CO        h
                                             3      3                    6 3
                                           ss
                                           73 73                         6 ■«
                                             3 3                         3 C
                                           .2 .2                   Ph    <u o
                                             CCj    c3
                                    Q Z    ZZ                Z     QSZ
                                                                                   Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep                                                                                                                 519


                                                                                                                                 w i>
                                                                                                                                 d- O'
                                                                                                                                           •>
                                                                                                                   tJ
                                                                                                                   d             CL»}
                                                                                                                   d             a
                                                                                                                                 O bii
                                                                                                                                 d •£<
dO                                                              <D       (U                                                      v ti
                                                                s        d                                                       bo
 d
S                                                 £<L> £)                                             £<L>
3                                                                        1
                                                                                                                   a             u a
                                                                                                                                 c
 oo                                       O J*5 ^ ^ M
                                          4—1    CO     00      C/3      C/D
                                                                                                  44
                                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                                                 U
VO                                        ro Ov 00 00
                                          <r^ M M M M
                                                                         d                            o
                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                    (U
 *r\
                   3 d                                                                                                           13K 1
                                                                                                                   "d
                                                                                                                    4—*
                                                                                                                     o>>         ,S
                                                                                                                                                            Ov
                                                                                                                   Ph
 O
VO         N o                            VO (N vo VO 00                             o § vo                                                                 a
 M                                         Tf Tt rj- ’t                             VO h VO                        6o
           TV                             OI 1 I 1 voI
                                                                                                                                 ^ M
 I
           ^ 4f                                  00 00 00                           oI O 2                                        C<
                                                                                                                                                             O'
                                                                                                                                                             N
 fS                                       N
                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                    d            <0 N
                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                   cd              . G
                                                                                                                                 ^ O                        Co
                                                                                                                     <L>
                                                                                                                     00
                     d
                      <u                                                                                            <                      u
                     d                         d)                                   1)                               <L)N                  <L>
                                                                                                                                          43
                      u
                      0                        CTJ                                  03                               d
                      0                        5H                                   5h
                                                                                    <L>               <U             on                                     £
 43
  O
           43         I)
                      5-4
                                               <U   v _
                                           <u ^3 d I) d                             d                 d             PQ
  2                   4—•                  d 0 d -*-1 •*-*
                                           0
                                                                                     0                  o
                       O
  6         a       1 d                    d esaa                                    a                               C3
                                                                                                                                  o J?
                                                                                                                    H-J                                       d
                                                                                                                                  Kft                       3
                                                                                                                                                            C/3
                                                                                                        <L>
                                                                                                                                  is                          d)
                                                                                                                                                              5h
                                            <D                                                      6                                                         d
                                            a                                                                                     S|
              o Td xl                       6                                                  '5 '
                                                                                                <D £
                                                                                                    >,
                                                                                                                      <u                                      <u
                                                                                                                                                             ■a
              *3        <U       l>         y*~>
                    sil- A                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                      >>          "•Pi *-ia
              XXX
              XXX                                           X        X         I               Is                    PS               _     d                 d
                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                   d                              o
                                                <D (1) W <D                                     <L>                  d  d          >d g>
                                                Ml bB M M                                      44
                                             «<<<<                                                                                 bD                  d ad d d d d d
                                            43 <u <u o u                                                             S3             §< “               d
                                                                                                                                                           32335  ^                               d
                                             *3 N N N N                                                                                                d P^
                                            73 S3 (3 S3 C
                                             9 o o o o                                                                              a<                 <u




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Table 8 Summary of cattle hair measurements (microns).
                                                                                          I u                                                          4P      ro d d vo d d d
                                            %mm«w                                         1 u<DX
                                                                                                                                   ^    a                     vo vo vo vo vo vo vo
                                                                                                                                   ^H ruO              d Q\ o\ o\ G\ o\ o\ o\
                                                                                                CL
                                                                                                                                   on ^                d
                                                                                       d
                                                                                       05c/3
                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                     X a
                                                                                      0d                                           dd L

                                                      ,<D                      a
                                                                                     <ato                               o          K
                                                                                                                                      Li .d
                                                <L> LLi                        3
                                                                                         4<S O
                                                                                                                        U
                                                O G     ^ C/3
                                                                                          “ <u                                        >         (/)

                                                Z) oft <U <L>                             CO t_j                                      2^
                                                       > X
                                                             o5-i 'rt                    X rt                                         - a
                                                                                                                                      <D
                                                <L>
                                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                d      ?,?a,5§S33
                                                hi +_J<L> 'd oo is
                                                c3     00
                                                             X
                                                             4-*
                                                                                         TJ ^
                                                                                          a|
                                                                                                                        3             OJ        5-1
                                                (U cfl (U X O
                                                                                         .p •s                           <L>          wrq
                                                                                                                                      O _rj
                                                                      < pH               V*      4—1                     X
                                                                                                  03                                  (D
                                                                                                 •5—*                                 d
                                                                                                  OJ                                             5-1
                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                  <u                                  o




                                                                                                                                                                                                              (/) Ryder, M. L. (1964)- ibid.
                                                                                                                            O   ro a
                                                                                                  1) /—N
                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                            <L> Ov                     S !S |3 |3 jo |S jo |o
                o                                                                                 o ^                      P4
                o                                                                                 o 8                              ON •
      Is       N                                                                                  L> Q                          a
                                                                                                                           ’d*  a b-G'
                                                                                                                                    . vo                vovovovovovovovo
               *dbO                                                                               d
                                                                                                  o^
                                                                                                              ^            vo                    OV     OvOvOvOvOvOvOvOv
                   5h                                                                                                       Ov
       i t3        3                                                                              s?0-) so
       •r   sCtJ                                                                                      5h      07                >u
       f         [§                                                                                                                        hJl-3l4i—)i—JhJhJhJ
        O u  <u  *3                                                                                   g§                       o M • •
       d         w                                                                                        f.
                                                                                                                              CO 5-1 d vo
                                                                                                                                 « < I
         5h
         <D ”g'd                                                                                      <ud                        d „ V~\
       X q        <l>                                                                                                            % u t> (UDWOWWOd)          t—1       J—i   5—1   5—1   l   L-i   L-<   5—1

         rt 43q <uu                                                                                                         3 a d<uu d<D w d d d d d d d d
         cd O d d5h ^                                                                                                            -'>> d
       X              d                                                             K -d                      <u            d CV 00 p< a
                 d O
                   - 5h                                                             5-                        Q.
               tci X‘ fO
     <D\ x ti fl3 S -2
                                                                                                                                                        d *>                      bo^; :
       X

 § « y ,£P g S g^S                                                                  ^ §                       §
                  ? £                                                                                         W
 So
 -dopaa                      *        *
520    Part IV Animals      RYDER


the hairy medium wool has a skewed-to-fine distribution with a few hairs
greater than 6071 in diameter. The hairy type has a continuous (although often
skewed-to-fine) distribution with a relatively high proportion of hairy (i.e.
medullated) fibres that are often over 100/z in diameter.




       Notes
        1 Ryder, M. L. (i960). A study of the coat of the Mouflon Ovis musimon
           with special reference to seasonal change, Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond., 135, pp.
           387-408.
        2 Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100.
        3 Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968). Wool Growth. London.
        4 Wright, N. C. (1954). The ecology of domestic animals, in Hammond, J.
           (ed.) Progress in the Physiology of Farm Animals, 1. London, pp. 191-251.
        5 Flannery, K. V. ibid.
        6 Ryder, M. L. (1959). Sheep of the ancient civilizations. Wool Knowledge,
          4 (12), pp. 10-14.
        7 Ryder, M. L. Unpublished data.
        8 Mayr, E. (1942). Systematics atid the Origin of Species. New York.
       9 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). Fleece evolution in domestic sheep, Nature, Lond.,
          204, pp. 555-9.
      10 Rosenqvist, A. M. (1964). Investigations of woollen fibres in the Oseberg
          find, Proc. Int. Conf. on Conservation, pp. 133-6. Delft.
      11 Ryder, M. L. (1964b). The history of sheep breeds in Britain, Agric. Hist.
          Rev., 12 (1), pp. 1-12 and (2), pp. 68-82; Ryder, M. L. (1968a). The
          evolution of Scottish breeds of sheep, Scot. Stud., 12.
      12 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.
      13 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. (1968a). ibid.
      14 Ryder, M. L. (1966a). Coat structure in Soay sheep, Nature, Lond., 211,
          pp. 1092-3; Ryder, M. L. (1968b). Fleece structure in some native and
          unimproved breeds of sheep, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 85, pp. 143-170.
      15 Ryder, M. L. (1961). A specimen of Asiatic sheepskin from the fourth or
          fifth century B.C., Aust.J. Sci., 24, pp. 246-8.
      16 Ryder, M. L. (1966a). ibid.
      17 Ryder, M. L. (1966b). Coat structure and seasonal shedding in goats,
          Anim. Prod., 8, pp. 289-302.
      18 Ryder, M. L. (1963a). Remains derived from skin, in Brothwell, D. R. and
          Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London.
      19 Ryder, M. L. (1962). The histological examination of skin in the study
          of the domestication of sheep, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 77, pp. 168-71.
      20 Ryder, M. L. (1962). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968).
          ibid.
      21 Flannery, K. V. (1965). The ecology of early food production in Meso¬
          potamia, Science, 147, pp. 1247-56.
      22 Yadin, Y. (1963). The Finds from the Bar-Kokhba Period in the Cave of the
          Letters. Jerusalem.
      23 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.
      24 Fraser, A. S. and Hamada, M. K. O. (1952). Observations on the birth-
          coats and skins of several breeds and crosses of British sheep, Proc. Roy.
          Soc. Edin., B, 64, pp. 462-77.
      25 Bowden, P. J. (1962). The Wool Trade in Tudor and Stuart England.
          London.
      26 Ryder, M. L. Unpublished data.
                           Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep     521

27 Ryder, M. L. (1959). ibid.
28 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.
29 Ryder, M. L. (1964b). ibid.
30 Ryder, M. L. (1968b). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. (1968c). The wools of Britain.
   (Paper presented at Brit. Ass. 1967) to be published in The Wool Textile
   Industry in Great Britain. London.
31 Ryder, M. L. (1968a). ibid.
32 Nahlik, A. (1963). The textiles of Novgorod, Akedemi Nauk, 123 (IV),
   p. 228.
33 Ryder, M. L. (1968b). ibid.
34 Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968). ibid.
35 Short, B. F. (1958). Dominant felting lustre mutant fleece-type in
   Australian Merino sheep, Nature, Lond., 181, pp. 1414-15.
36 Ryder, M. L. (1963b). Report on the Meare skin, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 29,
   p. 98.
37 Piggott, S. (1962). Heads and hoofs, Antiquity, 36, pp. 110-18.
38 Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). The excavation of a Bos
   primigenius at Lowe’s farm, Littleport, Proc. Cain. Ant. Soc., 54, pp. 3-16.
39 Ryder, M. L. (1963a). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968).
   ibid.
Part V: Human nutrition
      N. A. BARNICOT

      Human nutrition: evolutionary perspectives


The domestication of plants and animals initiated major changes in human
ecology. These changes, leading to larger settled communities and ultimately
to the amenities of urban life, may be regarded as beneficial, but they also
had dangers. Settled cultivators must face the threat of famine due to the
vagaries of weather and the onslaughts of pests, whereas hunter-gatherers,
exploiting a wider range of foodstuffs and with fewer mouths to feed, are
likely to be more secure in this respect. It is true that incidents of starvation
have been recorded among Eskimos and among aborigines of the Central
Australian Desert but these habitats are rather extreme and probably atypical
of the long hunting-gathering phase of human history. Plant domestication
can also lead to over-emphasis of a single staple such as rice, maize, cassava
or plantain; if this staple is poor in certain nutrients deficiency disease may
result.
   Apart from the direct effects on nutrition, the change from food collecting
to food production obviously involved a host of secondary changes in human
ecology and these may have greatly altered the nature and magnitudes of
evolutionary selective pressures to which human populations were exposed.
The creation of novel micro-environments by human interference led in some
cases to closer contact with disease vectors, such as mosquitoes carrying
malaria or rats carrying plague-infected fleas. The larger communities made
possible by efficient agriculture provided a more stable reservoir for various
pathogens and crowded, sedentary conditions favoured transmission of
microbial diseases.
   If domestication was a revolution in the human food quest it was not the
first, at least if we take man’s more remote ancestors into account. At some
stage there must have been a transition from a largely vegetarian diet to a
hunting economy providing significant amounts of meat. On an even longer
evolutionary time scale the change was more complex. Many primitive
mammals, including some lemurs, eat a variety of small animal food. Pre¬
sumably the monkeys and apes, which are predominantly vegetarian, evolved
from such creatures and it is a reasonable inference that the earlier members
of the hominid lineage were also vegetarians, though the evidence is scanty
526   Part V Human nutrition      barnicot


  In the last twenty years or so much new evidence relating to these problems
has come to hand and it may be useful to mention some of it briefly. First,
there have been important discoveries of fossils showing features transitional
to man and second, there has been a resurgence of studies on wild primates.
  According to Petter1, some Madagascar lemurs such as Phaner furcifer and
Microcebus murinus eat considerable amounts of small animal food. Dauben-
tonia, a highly specialized nocturnal form, lives mainly on insect larvae.
On the other hand Lemur was never seen to eat animal prey, while Lepilemur
and the Indridae are vegetarians restricted to a rather narrow range of plant
foods.
  Baboons, which differ from most other non-human primates in living on
the ground and usually, though not exclusively, in open savannah, are pre¬
dominantly vegetarians, eating a great range of plant species. At the Cape2
they live on certain flowers, bulbs, and cones, varying their diet according to
seasonal availability. In the Kenya grasslands they subsist mainly on the seeds,
shoots and rhizomes of grasses throughout the year. Insects are usually a
minor dietary component and young mammals are only occasionally killed
and eaten. Troops living near the shore at the Cape often ate mussels and
limpets. Evidently baboons show a good deal of dietary adaptability. Observa¬
tion on the Japanese macaque3 showed that troops living in essentially the
same habitat might differ considerably in the plant foods habitually exploited
and also in their propensity to adopt new foods introduced by humans.
Some species of monkey are more specialized in their dietary habits. The
Colobidae are leaf eaters, sometimes gaining their water supply from this
source as well as solid nutrients and showing anatomical modifications of the
stomach.
  Monkeys are of course only distantly related to man but these studies may
provide some basis for informed speculation about the food habits of the
Oligocene or early Miocene forms from which the Hominidae evolved.
  The anthropoid apes of today, notably the chimpanzee and gorilla, show
many resemblances to man at the gross anatomical, chromosomal and
molecular levels and, according to some workers, may have diverged from the
hominid lineage as late as the Pliocene. Chimpanzees in the rain forest of
Uganda4 ate many species of vegetable food and very seldom insects. In
more open deciduous woodland, however, Goodall5 saw them eat gall-fly
larvae, ants and termites and they occasionally killed small mammals. Here again
we have evidence of local variation in dietary habits. Mountain gorillas
according to Schaller6 live in country ranging from lowland rain forest to
mountain forest and bamboo, exploiting a different range of plants in each
habitat.
  Turning to the fossils the most interesting in relation to human evolution
are the Australopithecinae recovered from early Pleistocene deposits in South
and East Africa. The evidence of the pelvis and lower limb shows that these
small-brained and large-jawed creatures were capable of bipedalism. It has
                            Evolutionary perspectives in human nutrition      527

long been recognized that bipedalism, by freeing the hands for manipulation,
may have been a critical factor in the emergence of tool using and making.
At Makapan in South Africa Dart found many ungulate bones associated with
australopithecine remains and he suggested that some were used as tools and
may have inflicted the fractures found on baboon skulls from these deposits.
Pebble tools have been found at Sterkfontein, another australopithecine site
and at Olduvai, Leakey7 found them on a living floor along with an australo¬
pithecine skull and the broken bones of small mammals, birds and reptiles
which he regarded as the food debris of this creature. Two species of Aus¬
tralopithecus are commonly recognized. One (A. robustus or Paranthropus) has
massive jaws and molar teeth, while in the other (A. africanus) these features
are less pronounced. Robinson8 has suggested that the former retained the
ancestral vegetarian habit while in the latter hunting for meat was more
developed. However the Olduvai form mentioned above [Zinjanthr opus
boisei or A. boisei) is of the robustus type despite its apparent association with
tools and animal food. Later more remains were found at this horizon and
also above and below it. These are claimed to be significantly more advanced
(i.e. man-like) than A. boisei and it is suggested that this form, named Homo
habilis, was the tool maker. Similarly it has been suggested that a more
gracile jaw found at Sterkfontein (Telanthropus) represents the tool making
population at this site. It is apparent that the interpretation of these very
interesting fossils is not unequivocal and it is still a subject for much con¬
troversy.
   Remains of still earlier hominids are much less abundant. Simons9 has
recently re-examined fossil primate material from the Upper Miocene and
Lower Pliocene of Northern India which includes jaw fragments assignable to
Ramapithecus. The small canine teeth, molar cusp pattern and short face lead
him to classify this form as a hominid and to conjecture that some of the
features in which the australopithecines approach man were already fore¬
shadowed in this fourteen million year old fossil.
  There is of course much archaeological material testifying to the hunting
activities of man from the Middle Pleistocene onwards. The remains of
hearths at Choukoutien indicate that cooking, at least in the form of roasting,
may have been practised half a million years ago. This practice certainly
distinguishes man from other primates. While making accessible certain
foods which would otherwise be rather indigestible it may, like other types
of food processing, lead to loss of nutrients. Archaeological sites sometimes
yield good evidence of the kinds of large mammals most hunted but it is
difficult to form a quantitative picture of the diets of prehistoric man,
especially the significance of vegetable foods. As Brothwell10 suggests a
search for human faecal remains might yield valuable evidence but it is not
likely to be successful unless conditions were unusually dry.
   When we turn to the literature on modern hunter-gatherers we find lists
of the plant and animal species exploited but very little about the amounts
528   Part V Human nutrition      barnicot


of each consumed and their nutritional value. The reasons for this are obvious.
Quantitative surveys are not easy to conduct on settled communities and even
more difficult on nomadic hunters who may seek food individually or in small
groups over an extensive area and may consume significant amounts in the
bush rather than in camp. The nutritional values of most of their foods will
not be found in standard food tables and must be determined by laborious
analyses. The availability of major foods is likely to vary with season so that a
satisfactory study must extend over at least a year. There are some studies
of Eskimos, for example that of Hoygaard11 at Angmassalik in East Greenland,
but Eskimos, although nutritionally very interesting, exemplify a rather
special type of hunting economy. There is also McArthur’s12 fine attempt to
study Arnhem Land aborigines. These people, although living for much of
their time in settlements, still retained the skills necessary for periodic
episodes of bush life. The survey lasted only twenty-two days and therefore
gives only a glimpse of the nutritional economy of this type of existence.
Data on African hunter-gatherers such as Kalahari Bushmen and the Hadza
of Lake Eyasi are to be expected in the next few years.
  Yudkin13 has raised the interesting question of the factors determining
food choice and the possibility that man retains an innate predilection for
certain kinds of food. Obviously human diets are immensely varied and the
things which are regarded as fit to eat differ greatly from one culture to
another. Whether or not certain innate appetites exist it is clear that custom
and belief play a great part in determining food habits. Not infrequendy
they lead to neglect of nutritionally valuable foods such as eggs and fish.
Animals, such as pigs in New Guinea and cattle in many African pastoral
peoples are often desired more for prestige than as sources of meat14. The
human psyche is apt to surround matters concerning food with values foreign
to textbooks of nutrition.
  I have spoken of the evolutionary background of human food habits.
The mechanisms of evolutionary change are now better understood than
they were in Darwin’s time, thanks largely to great advances in genetics, both
experimental and theoretical. The discovery of many simply inherited varia¬
tions of proteins and blood group substances in man, has given us a vivid
picture of the great amount of genetical variability both between individuals
and between one population and another. For the most part we do not know
how this intrapopulation variability is maintained or what has caused regional
variation in gene frequencies but we suppose that natural selection must
have played an important role and we are always on the look out for functional
differences that may give particular genes selective value. It is virtually
certain that diet, as a major component of the human environment, must
have exerted such effects but we still have very little good evidence. One
case in point is the condition known as favism15 in which a mutant gene
causing deficiency of an enzyme, renders males, and some females, liable to
serious haemolytic attacks if they eat fava beans. We may also mention galac-
                            Evolutionary perspectives in human nutrition       529

tosemia, a rare inherited condition in which the metabolism of the sugar
of milk is defective. The problem of diabetes, a disease with both genetical
and nutritional components, is too complex to be more than mentioned here.
There must be many other inherited variations in enzymes and other physio¬
logically important proteins which influence individual efficiency in digesting,
absorbing and metabolizing various nutrients. Many of these effects may be
slight and difficult to detect but a search for them may open up new pathways
connecting nutrition with genetics and evolutionary studies.



      Notes
      1 Petter. J. J. (1965). The lemurs of Madagascar, in De Vore, I. (ed.)
        Primate Behaviour: field studies of monkeys and apes, New York. pp. 292-
        319.
      2 De Vore I. and Hall, K. R. (1965). Baboon ecology, in De Vore, I. (ed.)
        op. cit. pp. 20-52.
      3 Kawamura, S. (1963). The process of sub-culture propagation among
        Japanese macaques, in Southwick, C. H. (ed.) Primate Social Behaviour.
        London and New York. pp. 82-90.
      4 Reynolds, V. and Reynolds, F. (1965). Chimpanzees of the Budongo
        forest, in De Vore, I. (ed.) op. cit. pp. 368-424.
      5 Goodall, J. (1965). Chimpanzees of the Gombe Stream Reserve, in De
        Vore, I. (ed.) op. cit. pp. 425-73.
      6 Schaller, G. B. (1965). The behaviour of the Mountain Gorilla, in De
        Vore, I. (ed.) op. cit. pp. 324-67.
      7 Leakey, L. S. B. (1959). A new fossil skull from Olduvai, Nature, Lond.,
        184, pp. 491-3-
      8 Robinson, J. T. (1964). Some critical phases in the evolution of man, S'.
        African archaeol. Bull. 19, pp. 3-12.
      9 Simons, E. L. (1964). On the mandible of Ramapithecus, Proc. Nat. Acad.
        {Wash.), 51, pp. 528-35.
     10 Brothwell, D. R., this volume, pp. 531-45.
     11 Hoygaard, A. (1941). Studies on the Nutrition and Physiopathology of
        Eskimos. Oslo.
     12 McArthur, M. (i960). Food consumption and dietary levels of groups of
        aborigines living on naturally occurring foods, in Records of the American-
        Australian Scientific Expedition to Arnhem Land, II, pp. 90-135.
     13 Yudkin, J., this volume, pp. 547-52.
     14 Cranstone, B. A. L., this volume, pp. 247-63.
     15 For further details see Brothwell, D. R., this volume, ibid.
.
      D. R. BROTHWELL

      Dietary variation and the biology of earlier
      human populations

Studies on the biology of earlier human populations are relevant to a full
consideration of the impact of domestication in two ways:

1 The detailed examination of actual human remains may help to reconstruct
  the nutritional status of an early population, including dietary insufficiency.
  Early textual evidence of population health can at times help to substantiate
  or even extend our knowledge in this respect.
2 From an archaeological point of view, the most significant factor of all
  in the study of domestication, is that it greatly modified the living and
  livelihood of earlier groups, so that the demography of these populations
  underwent marked changes, and in some respects there probably emerged
  greater heterogeneity in terms of population composition than had been
  possible in earlier cultures. This may be tentatively deduced from the
  theoretical extrapolation back in time from historical facts about popula¬
  tions, and from modern demographic and palaeodemographic findings
  (which includes certain archaeological distribution data).

  An examination of human remains usually amounts to the study of skeletal
material, although in a few regions of the world soft tissues may remain
(Egypt, Peru, American South-west, Aleutian and Canary Islands). In recent
years, coprolites have been recognized as another valuable source of informa¬
tion on man, and one especially relevant to a consideration of earlier diets1.
  Regrettably, earlier archaeologists, in their hypnotic pursuit of habitations
and pottery, have ignored these “coarser” aspects of human life, and thus
only now are dried faeces being actively searched for at New and Old World
sites. What little information I shall have time to present will, I hope, help
to persuade more excavators to become enthusiastic about the lavatories as
well as the villas and palaces of earlier populations.
  But first, what sort of information can be derived from skeletal remains ?
Again, some comment of omission is necessary, for until recently, more time
was given to craniometry than to exploring possible ways in which the
environment might have influenced skeletal growth and variation. Thus, we
532   Part V Human nutrition       brothwell


know practically nothing about the variations in bone density or thickness of
cortical tissue, and to what extent the differences which do occur are deter¬
mined by nutritional as well as genetic and age factors. That bone density
differences occur in modern human populations seems reasonably established2,
and recently attempts have been made to get comparable results on excavated
skeletal material (on the now extinct Sadlermiut Eskimo group). Mazess3
concludes that their high bone densities may be influenced in part, but not
wholly, by their specialized animal food diet.
  Similarly, there is growing information on the thickness variation in com¬
pact bone of some modern groups, where again age, sex and race, as well as
diet, are clearly important factors4. It may well be that this type of investiga¬
tion will be more applicable to the study of early skeletal series5 than density
analyses, owing to the added problem of post-mortem changes in prehistoric
and protohistoric skeletons (PI. vn, b, c). In any case, it is obvious that such
lines of enquiry must in future be considered when investigating earlier
populations, especially where racial similarity but marked dietary divergence
are suspected. From the point of view of results meaningful to the archaeolo¬
gist, discussion of this subject is alas five or ten years too soon!
  Perhaps the link between studies on ancient diets and skeletons can be
most convincingly demonstrated by reference to certain well defined abnor¬
malities detectable in bones or teeth, and to certain historic references to
early copulation health. Again, I want to emphasize problems and possibili¬
ties, as well as present facts.



       Vitamin D deficiency

This results in rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults, and can certainly
produce the most pronounced skeletal deformities of any dietary deficiency
condition. In particular, marked bowing of the femur, tibia and fibula may
result. On theoretical grounds, one might reasonably expect that the early
cereal cultivators may at times have relied too heavily on high carbohydrate
diets, and if too few fish and dairy foods (or sunlight) were available then
rickets would appear. Surprisingly, however, although vast numbers of
prehistoric and protohistoric skeletons have been examined in Europe and
North Africa alone, evidence of this deficiency disease is very scanty. In sum,
there are only one or two possible cases of bowing, and post-mortem deforma¬
tion may account for some. Possibly the only convincing prehistoric case in
Northern Europe is seen in a pair of tibiae from the Danish neolithic site of
Raevehoj. This rarity of the condition during much earlier times contrasts
noticeably with city samples dated to the industrial revolution, and for
instance the St. Bride’s Church skeletal series (London, c. 1750-1850) shows
some degree of rickets deformity in 6-9% of 233 individuals6. However, I
would not wish to argue that periodic and localized rickets did not occur
                                                  Early dietary variation   533

earlier, and it may perhaps be significant that Soranus of Ephesus (a.d.
98-138) refers to rachitic-like deformities of the legs in children in Italy,
while Chinese literature of the third century b.c. refers to crooked legs and
hunchback7.



      Scurvy

As well as a marked deterioration in oral health, vitamin C deficiency (scurvy)
can sometimes result in post-cranial changes, including vertebral collapse
(though none are pathognomonic). The broad omnivorous diet of early hunt¬
ing and collecting peoples and the probable availability, at least seasonably,
of fruit and vegetables to the early cultivators would certainly not encourage
this condition. However, it would be worth making a search for possible
evidence of this disease, and indeed I have been recently debating whether
some of the relatively numerous cases of vertebral collapse in Amerindian
skeletons might have resulted from scurvy. Certainly they are not all the
result of senile osteoporosis. In Europe, both Hippocrates and Pliny were
acquainted with the disease, but whether it occurred in villages and towns
ordinarily, or only in times of war and unrest, is debatable.



      Vitamin A and B-complex deficiencies

Deficiencies in vitamin A and B do not result in marked bone changes, but
there is some information about them nevertheless. Inadequate vitamin A
commonly results in nyctalopia. Possibly the earliest reference to this “night
blindness” is in the Ebers Papyrus (c. 1600 B.C.), followed by Hippocrates,
and later in Chinese literature (a.d. 610). Early communities specializing
in intensive cereal cultivation with minimal hunting or stockbreeding, would
be especially likely to this health hazard. Beriberi (B1 deficiency) may have
been a serious problem in eastern Asia for some millennia; at least it is men¬
tioned in the Su Wen, a Chinese text of c. 2690 B.C. A good example of mass
involvement in such a disease is recorded in the long siege of T’ai Ch’eng
(a.d. 529), when nine-tenths of the population of 120,000 developed swelling
of the body, shortness of breath and died8. Similarly, Strabo mentions the
condition in Roman troops.
  Pellagra (B2 deficiency) is not known for sure from earlier New World
cultures, but might be inferred from its occurrence in some parts of Central
America today, and the great reliance placed upon maize by Maya and Aztec
economies.
534   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell




      Iodine insufficiency

This is a localized phenomenon, related to iodine deficient soils in various
parts of the world. One might question, however, whether the more sedentary
nature of many populations during post-mesolithic times might have further
encouraged thyroid malfunction. Certainly skeletal evidence of cretinism
would be worth searching for in areas recently affected. Pliny was certainly
aware of endemic goitre in some Alpine areas.



      General famine

Whereas in palaeolithic hunting and collecting economies there must have
been a continual “trimming away” of the older and less healthy members of
the group, relative to the abundance of food in a particular area, the neolithic
revolution encouraged vast changes. Extended food resources, and perhaps
better storage methods, permitted survival to the point where severer climatic
fluctuations or plant and animal disease precipitated a general food crisis
on a scale rather unlikely in earlier cultures.
  There is of course textual and even art evidence (Fig. i) for famines,
extending back patchily over four thousand years. China, a country famous
for its food shortages, has over 1800 famines recorded just for the more
recent period 100 b.c. to a.d. 1910. Indeed, the populace, according to a
first century B.C. publication9 attempted to adapt to the food crises after the
agricultural revolution by intentionally growing the water darnel, a weed
tolerant to drought and flood, and thus a valuable provision in times of
shortage.
  At times, famines must have been sufficiently long term to have markedly
influenced child growth in the communities affected. However, although such
crises may have impeded growth, and even resulted in mean adult statures
less than potentially realizable (given a better nutritional standard), it is still
not easy to demonstrate nutritionally induced differences by reference to
skeletal studies. Prior to any such enquiry, one must be fairly confident that
the populations to be considered are derived from the same “stock” (whether
the samples are spatially or temporarily separated). To my knowledge,
Steffensen10 is the only one so far who has been brave enough to try to relate
probable changes in nutritional level with estimated mean stature, in this
case in early Icelanders (Fig. 2). In view of the fact that neolithic and later
prehistoric stature estimates show variation in Europe and South-west Asia,
this type of investigation deserves following up, although much caution needs
to be exercised.
                                                                                    u
Fig i Part of the “famine scene”, causeway of Unas, Saqqara. Dynasty V, c. 2350 b
     Drawing by Rosemary Powers
536   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell


                                           A.D.




           15 -1
  NO.
FAMINE
 YEARS

                       t-r

Fig 2 Changes in mean stature in Iceland during the past eight centuries, in
      comparison with the number of famine years each century. Adapted
      from Steffensen, J. (1958). Stature as a criterion of the nutritional level
      of Viking Age Icelanders, Prieji Viking a fundur, Third Viking Congress,
      pp. 39-51.


      Lathyrism

Dietary specialization may result in shortages of vital food constituents as
exemplified by vitamin deficiencies, but brief mention might also be made
of a condition resulting directly from the over-consumption of one particular
foodstuff. The drought-resistant pulse Lathyrus sativus has at times been
eaten in excessive amounts in parts of southern Europe, Africa and Asia,
especially when famine threatened. Unfortunately, a toxic factor in this food
can result in a spastic paralysis of the lower limbs. Hippocrates, without
understanding the condition, nevertheless writes: “At Ainos, all men and
women who ate continuously peas, became impotent in the legs and that
state perished.” No evidence is as yet forthcoming from skeletal material,
but as the condition possibly results in some degree of disuse atrophy in the
leg bones, the eventual possibility of cases in excavated human remains
must be kept in mind.
  While on the subject of eating pulses, it might be mentioned that in some
individuals—particularly in parts of the Mediterranean area—the eating of
fava beans {Vida fabd) produces favism. This is a haemolytic condition,
                                                  Early dietary variation   537


which can be quite serious, and which seems to be connected with the sex-
linked gene producing the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
disease. However, although there is clearly a “diet-based” selection pressure
operating against these bean eaters, the favism/G6PD deficiency situation
also seems to confer some advantage in resisting malaria. There is thus a
balance of the negative and positive factors, at least in the relevant malarial
areas. The example nevertheless demonstrates that diet can have close genetic¬
microevolutionary associations.



      Oral health

I need not establish the fact here that diet can be detrimental to oral health,
and in particular is a major contributing factor in caries development. The
disease certainly occurred even in fossil man (PI. vna). Differences in caries
frequency in earlier populations and the possible influence of diet has also
been discussed in various journals11. By far the most dramatic increases in
dental decay have in fact taken place during the past two or three centuries,
without doubt as a result of the increased and widespread use of refined flours
and sugar. What happened as a result of the advent of agriculture does not
make such an exciting picture, indeed, although I think it had its effect, there
would seem to have been rather a delayed reaction. Of the various neolithic
dental samples so far studied, there is no significant increase in caries
rate above those for palaeolithic and mesolithic groups and a total sample
(c. 3000-1000 b.c.) of nearly 30,000 teeth show a caries percentage of only
3‘i12.
   By Iron Age times there are noticeable increases in some samples, although
these late prehistoric groups did not simply show a trend in ever higher
figures. The British Bronze Age caries figure is in fact noticeably smaller
than the neolithic one, and I have already questioned whether this might
give support to Childe’s13 suggestion that the former people were more
pastoral and less dependent upon cereals in their diet than the latter group14.
To what extent related geographical/agricultural zones might show caries
rate differences has recently been questioned by Isobel Smith15, from the
point of view of British neolithic “highland” and “lowland” zones. So far,
the regional British neolithic figures I have assembled, for the most part
on inadequate samples, do not seem to suggest any significant variation in
this respect. Again, however, it is the type of enquiry which might eventually
prove revealing in some areas, and by Saxon times in England, there is
certainly evidence of regional variation (Fig. 3).
  Perhaps I should briefly mention certain other aspects of oral health
Enamel hypoplasia has been noted in hominid teeth from early pleistocene
to recent times. It can result from nutritional disturbances, but also from
infective disease, and until this basic problem is explored further—with
538   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell


a view to possible ways of differentiating infective and more chronic
malnutritional types of hypoplasia pattern, then useful conclusions are
impossible.
  Diet may influence periodontal diseases in two ways: (a) by direct but
local effects, such as in the increased calculus deposition and irritation
resulting from a high carbohydrate diet; (b) by systemic effects, as in protein
deficiency periodontitis16. Information on periodontal disease in earlier
populations rests on the careful assessment of alveolar bone loss, and of course
any frequency will greatly underestimate a true frequency of all degrees of
periodontal disease in the living. However, useful comparisons can still be




Fig 3 Regional variation in caries frequencies during Saxon times, as seen in
      the total caries percentage for seven cemetery groups.


made between skeletal series, but as yet there is little standardization of
rating methods, or for that matter results. In a study I have been undertaking
with colleagues17 on early Egyptian groups we are able to demonstrate a marked
increase in alveolar bone loss from predynastic to late dynastic times, and it
would seem reasonable to blame diet in part for this.
  As Alexandersen18 has reviewed the published data in detail, I need not
expand further here, except perhaps to say that alveolar bone loss in early
skeletons may, in certain circumstances, specifically suggest one form of
dietary inadequacy. Thus, Mellquist and Sandberg19 tentatively concluded
that the poor periodontal health in many Norsemen might well have resulted
from scurvy.
                                                    Early dietary variation    539




      Coprolite studies

I have considered at some length the question of dietary variation, and possible
ways in which skeletal and dental studies may assist in “reconstructing” the
food resources of a population. Far less coprolite material is available than
skeletons, and very little information on diet as yet forthcoming from such
remains; but analysis of such material promises much for the future. As I
say, this depends upon the extent of archaeological interest and cooperation.
The laboratory of physical anthropology at the B.M. (N.H.) is only just
beginning investigations of this sort, and I am finding it very difficult to get a
series of coprolite samples for comparative purposes. Incidentally, there
might be other possibilities of food residue collection from the alimentary
tract of long decomposed bodies. Hazzledine Warren20 as long ago as 1911
reported on a prehistoric British skeleton buried in sand in which seed
 remains were identified and removed from the abdominal area. Although the
 burials were not ideal, I have recently tried removal of grave earth from the
 lower abdominal region of Dark Age skeletons, and by differential flotation,
 the removal of organic remains. However, where the grave fill contains a
 variety of organic debris, as in this case, the task of food residue identification
 is doubly difficult.
    Coprolite studies have quite blossomed out in the past ten years. The
 excellent work of Callen and Cameron21 and Callen22 has been followed by
 such detailed work as Watson and Yamell23 and the various papers given in
 No. 70 of the University of California Archaeological Survey (1967) on Nevada
 cave coprolites. Parasitological studies on ancient faeces have been made24
 and even faecal deposits from northern European soils can be rewarding
(PI. viid).
   Coprolites have begun to give precise information on the wide range of
foodstuffs consumed by individuals of differing cultures, and of course have
assisted in establishing the spread and antiquity of certain domesticated
plants. The breadth of potential information is enormous, and even such
data as the number and size of fish bones consumed have clear relevance
to a consideration of calcium intake or the degree to which foods were chewed
or bolted. Work in progress on coprolites from Asiab, Iran by J. R. Harlan,
R. B. Stewart and colleagues, seems to show evidence of geophagia25.



       Diet, demography and microevolution

 “Population” wrote Huxley26, “is the problem of our age.” Though on a
 more modest scale, one just wonders whether the same might be said of the
 period following the agricultural revolution ? World population estimates for
 palaeolithic and mesolithic times vary from five to under twenty millions27.
540   Part V Human nutrition     brothwell


By 3000/4000 B.C. it has been estimated, mainly by extrapolating from the
demographic information on different economic groups today and historic
records, that world population numbers had possibly increased to over
twenty million and as much as ninety million. We now tolerate, three thousand
million! The trouble with using population data on modern “primitive”
populations, as Cook28 emphasizes, is that such people may no longer have
a truly pre-contact diet and have probably been influenced by the diseases of
civilized communities. Thus, however neat the graphs of early population
increase appear, the estimates are really very crude, and we really have no
idea of fertility or what proportion of neolithic people survived into the
reproductive period. The inadequate nature of neolithic skeletons prevents
direct assessment of this latter problem, although this material does enable
us to establish that survival into middle and late adult age groups was not
common. Mean life expectancy for neolithic adults was only about 31-34
years for males and 28-31 years for females (considering data by Angel,
Kobayashi, and Brothwell29, but in fact there was no significant increase of
life expectancy anywhere until about a century ago (when the world popula¬
tion had quietly increased to one thousand million).
   I do not wish to argue that, given the right environment, the temporal
and spacial mosaic of plant and animal domestication did not encourage
varying degrees of population expansion. But I must confess to a gnawing
doubt as to whether, in the case of population growth in post-glacial times
we really put the egg before the chicken. I don’t wish to labour the point, but
simply state the question, in view of its relevance to future palaeodemo-
graphic interpretation. At present we visualize the early cultivators bursting
forth in their new found fertility, but what of the hunters and collectors in
more favourable environments ? Why shouldn’t a fully exploited and adequate
“natural harvest”, permit a many fold expansion of group size, especially if
a few basic methods of food storage were known ? Given increased density,
more effective social organization could arise, and with it pooled ideas for
economic improvements, such as experimental planting of seeds or group
round-up of larger mammals. Jaffe30 gives the population of China in a.d. 2 as
c. 59,000,000, and one wonders to what extent the population was already
tottering by the time rice was introduced perhaps as early as 3000 B.C.
   Clearly, China has tolerated a high density/sub-starvation level at least
back into protohistoric times, so that one might well ask whether in this case
domestication did more than provide temporary relief, and simply permitted
greater population/environment disequilibrium. One tends to forget that
minimal subsistence calorie requirements (preventing serious malnutrition)
can be as low as 1900 for males, ranging down to 1000 in women and children31.
    My contribution to this book seems to be a remarkably gloomy one. The
more direct relationships between diet and disease have already been men¬
tioned, but cultivation and stock rearing resulted in other human health
problems. Polunin32, for instance, argues that the high frequency of malaria
                                                     Early dietary variation    541


in some Malayan aborigines (who practise a shifting agriculture), results
from the fact that the vector, Anopheles maculatus, is able to breed well in the
sunlit streams following forest clearance for cultivation. Similarly, Audy and
Harrison33 show that shifting cultivation encourages the spread of mite-borne
scrub typhus.
    Any tendency for numbers of individuals to cluster together raises health
problems, so that the early farmers possibly encouraged as never before the
build up of certain strains of bacilli and streptococci, as well as parasites of the
roundworm-hookworm type. Food storage and village or longhouse develop¬
ment must have initiated rodent infestation, and with it plague and other
killers. Perhaps, even, the association was sufficient for mutant forms of
murine leprosy to become adapted to man? The development of African
 pastoralism must in parts have been bedevilled by trypanosomiasis34, while
 South-west Asia and the Mediterranean world may have been the earliest
 centres for the transfer of bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis to man. Animal
 disease recorded by Middle Kingdom Egyptians is thought to have included
 anthrax35, and this may well be referred to by Homer, Pliny, and others36.
 In historic times, anthrax has reached epidemic proportions in man, and
 clearly may also have threatened late prehistoric peoples.
    Little of this can be confirmed by reference to early skeletons, although it is
 significant that tuberculosis seems to have been early established in Egypt37,
 and I have very tentatively suggested the presence of brucellosis in Bronze
 Age Jericho38.
    The relationship between dietary change, following the neolithic revolu¬
 tion, and human microevolution is both a new and dangerous field. Kelso and
 Armelagos39 have been brave enough to suggest a relationship between blood
 group frequency and dietary habit; high A beine linked with fat intake, and
 carbohydrate consumption with B. The hypothesis is interesting but at
 present difficult to substantiate40. Shatin41 has also considered the possible
 genetic consequences of dietary changes and population increase. Neolithic
 cultural development and contacts, he suggests, might have influenced out-
 breeding. Like Livingstone42 he believes that the sickle-cell polymorphism
 has probably undergone its most intensive selection among African food-
 producing groups during the past 5000 years. He further debates the reper¬
 cussions of neolithic and later dietary change on the progress diseases as
 divergent as treponematoses, peptic ulceration and coronary disease. This,
 as I say, is a difficult field, but in view of the profound dietary changes which
 have taken place, clearly merits serious attention.
    Finally, a few words about human populations and possible adaptive
 variation resulting from the neolithic economy changes. Coon43 has argued
 that die earliest Old World farmers, which he says were “presumably fight-
 skinned, bearded Caucasoids similar to those still inhibiting the Near East”,
 migrated in bands into northern Europe, North Africa, India and China.
542   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell


The reason why they are not now to be seen in countries such as China he
states is because these people hybridized with the indigenous population—
who were adaptively more successful and thus emerged as the conspicuous
type again. Somehow, this view doesn’t seem satisfactory, and surely the
picture must have been far more complex ? Certainly, there must have been
varied movements of people in search of new productive lands, but at the
same time a cultural “chain reaction” must have ensured the handing on of
domestication ideas and products far more rapidly than human movements.
I am reminded, for instance, of the spread of the banana in the Amazonian
area of South America, where it has reached isolated tribes deep in the
interior.
   It would seem reasonable to say that the agricultural revolution encouraged
a differential increase and expansion of some groups. Population size in the
Mexican and Andean civilizations grew to far more than the total for the rest
of the New World prior to European contact44; African Negro groups also
flourished, and in movements southwards compressed the Khoisan peoples
into far more restricted territories. In South-east Asia, mongoloid expansion
must have been encouraged if not dictated by population pressures, and per¬
haps the non-mongoloid Ainu of Japan represent one of the other Asiatic
stocks brought near to extinction by mongoloid economic competition.
  In populations which expanded too much and too fast, and where environ¬
mental factors caused periodic crop failure, there is the possibility that some
groups may have started to become “famine adapted” for smaller body size
and smaller calorie needs. I state this only in a very tentative way, having
found no convincing data so far to support it. Unfortunately, microevo¬
lutionary factors pull in various ways and directions at once, so that what may
result in body form may be rather a biological “compromise”. Perhaps a
recent speculation by Braes45 is also relevant here, for she debates the possi¬
bility of physical variation having differential survival value in markedly
contrasting earlier cultures and economies. Alas, these are still only ideas,
but perhaps eventually laboratory or field studies may show that here also,
the history of domestication and human biology have significant links46.




      Notes
      1 Callen, E. O. (1963). Diet as revealed by coprolites, in Brothwell, D. and
        Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London, pp. 186-94; Heizer,
        R. F. (1967). Analysis of human coprolites from a dry Nevada cave, Reps.
        Univ. Cal. Archaeol. Survey, Berkeley. 70, pp. 1-20.
      2 Baker, P. T. and Angel, J. L. (1965). Old age changes in bone density:
        sex and race factors in the United States, Hum. Biol. 37, pp. 104-21;
        Baker, P. T. and Little, M. A. (1965). Bone density changes with age,
        altitude, sex and race factors in Peruvians, Hum. Biol., 37, pp. 122-36.
      3 Mazess, R. B. (1966). Bone density in Sadlermiut Eskimo, Hum. Biol.,
        38, pp. 42-9.
                                               Early dietary variation     543


 4 Garn, S. M., Pao, E. M. and Rihl, M. E. (1964). Compact bone in
   Chinese and Japanese, Science, 143, pp. 1439-40; Garn, S. M., Rohmann,
   C. G. and Nolan, P. (1964). The developmental nature of bone changes
   during aging, in J. E. Birren (ed.) Relations of Development and Aging.
   Illinois, pp. 41-61; Garn, S. M. (1966). Malnutrition and skeletal develop¬
   ment in the pre-school child, in Pre-school child Malnutrition. Nat. Acad.
   Sci.-Nat. Res. Coun. Washington, pp. 43-62.
 5 Brothwell, D. R., Molleson, T. I. and Metreweli, C. (1968). Radiological
   aspects of normal variation in earlier skeletons: an exploratory study, in
   D. R. Brothwell (ed.) The Skeletal Biology of Earlier Human Populations,
   pp. 149-72. Oxford.
 6 Powers, R. Personal communication.
 7 Lee, T’ao (1940). Historical notes on some vitamin deficiency diseases in
   China, Chinese Med.J., 58, pp. 314-23.
 8 Hou, H. C. and Yu, C. M. (1940). Beriberi in ancient medical literature,
   Chinese Med.J., 58, pp. 302-13.
 9 Sheng-Han, S. (1965). Translated. On “Fan Sheng-Chih Shu”. An
   Agriculturists Book of China Written by Fan Sheng-Chih in the First
   Century B.C. Peking.
10 Steffensen, J. (1958). Stature as a criterion of the nutritional level of
   Viking Age Icelanders, Prioji Vikingafundur, Third Viking Congress, pp.
   39-51-
11 See Brothwell, D. R. (1959). Teeth in earlier human populations, Proc.
   Nutr. Soc., 18, pp. 59-65; and Brothwell, D. R. (1963). The macro-
   scropic dental pathology of some earlier human populations, in Brothwell,
   D. R. (ed.) Dental Anthropology, pp. 271-88. Oxford, for earlier literature.
12 Brothwell, D. R. (1963). ibid.
13 Childe, V. G. (1949). Prehistoric Communities of the British Isles. London.
14 Brothwell, D. R. (i960). The Bronze Age people of Yorkshire; a general
   survey, Adv. Sci., 16, pp. 311-32.
15 Smith, I. F. (1964) in Field, N. H., Matthews, C. L. and Smith, I. F.
   New Neolithic sites in Dorset and Bedfordshire, with a note on the
   distribution of Neolithic storage-pits in Britain, Proc. Prehist. Soc.,
   3°j PP- 355-6o.
16 Bradford, E. W. (1959). Food and the periodontal diseases, Proc. Nutr.
   Soc., 18, pp. 59-65.
17 C. Wood Robinson and H. G. Carr. Unpublished data.
18 Alexandersen, V. (1967). The pathology of the jaws and the temporo¬
   mandibular joint in Brothwell, D. R. and Sandison, A. T. (eds.) Diseases
   in Antiquity. Illinois, pp. 551-95-
19 Mellquist, C. and Sandberg. T. (1939). Odontological studies of about
   1400 Mediaeval skulls from Halland and Scania in Sweden and from the
   Norse Colony in Greenland and a contribution to the knowledge of their
   anthropology, Odont. T. Supp., 3B.
20 Warren, S. H. (1911). On a prehistoric interment near Walton-on-Naze,
   Essex Naturalist., 16, pp. 198-208.
21 Callen, E. O. and Cameron, T. W. M. (i960). A prehistoric diet revealed
   in coprolites. New Scientist, 8, pp. 35-40.
22 Callen, E. O. (1963). Diet as revealed by Coprolites, in Brothwell D. R.
   and Higgs, E. S. op. cit., pp. 186—94; Callen, E. O. (1965). Food habits
   of Some Pre-Columbian Mexican Indians, Econ. Bot., 19, pp. 335-43.
23 Watson, P. J. and Yarnell, R. A. (1966). Archaeological and Paleoethno-
   logical investigations in Salts Cave, Mammoth Cave National Park,
   Kentucky, Amer. Antiquity, 31, pp. 842-9.
24 Samuels, R. (1965). Parasitological study of long-dried fecal samples,
   Mem. Soc. Am. Archaeol., 19, pp. 175-9; Tubbs, D. Y. and Berger, R.
544   Hart V Human nutrition       brothwell


         (1967). The variability of pathogens in ancient human coprolites, Reps
         Univ. Cal. Archaeol. Survey, Berkeley, 70, pp. 89-92; Pike, A. W. (1967).
         The recovery of parasite eggs from ancient cesspit and latrine deposits:
         an approach to the study of early parasite infections, in Brothwell D. R.
         and Sandison, A. T. op. cit., pp. 184-8.
      25 Braidwood, R. V., Personal communication.
      26 Huxley, J. (1957). New Bottles for New Wine. London.
      27 Huxley, J. (1957). ibid; Deevey, E. S. (i960). The human population,
         Scientific American, 203, pp. 194-204.
      28 Cook, S. F. (1947). Survivorship in aboriginal populations. Hum. Biol.,
         19, pp. 83-9.
      29 Angel, J. L. (1947). The length of life in Ancient Greece, J. Gerontol.,
         2, pp. 18-24; Kobayashi, K. (1967). Trend in the length of life based on
         human skeletons from prehistoric to modern times in Japan, J. Fac. Sci.
         Univ. Tokyo., Sect. V, 3, pp. 109-60; Brothwell, D. R. (1968). The
         human biology of the Neolithic population in Britain (in press).
      30 Jaffe, A. J. (1947). Notes on the rate of growth of the Chinese population.
         Hum. Biol., 19, pp. 1-11.
      31 Davidson, S. and Passmore, R. (1967). Human Nutrition and Dietetics.
         Edinburgh.
      32 Polunin, I. (i960). The effects of shifting agriculture on human health and
         disease, Symposium on the impact of man on humid tropics vegetation.
         UNESCO Science Co-operation Office for S.E. Asia, Goroka, Territory of
         Papua and New Guinea, pp. 388-93.
      33 Audy, J. R. and Harrison, J. L. (1951). A review of investigations on mite
         typhus in Burma and Malaya, 1945-50, Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg.,
         44, pp. 371-404.
      34 Lambrecht, F. L. (1964). Aspects of evolution and ecology of tsetse flies
         and trypanosomiasis in prehistoric African environment, J. Afr. Hist., 5.
         24 pp.
      35 Steele, J. H. (1962). Animal Disease and Human Health. Food and Agri¬
         culture Organization of the United Nations, Roma. Freedom from Hunger
         Campaign.
      36 Vaughan, V. (1923). Epidemiology and Public Health. London. 2, pp. 851—
         61.
      37 Morse, D., Brothwell, D. R. and Ucko, P. J. (1964). Tuberculosis in
         Ancient Egypt, Am. Rev. Resp. Dis., 90, pp. 524-41.
      38 Brothwell, D. R. (1965). The palaeopathology of the E.B.-M.B. and
         Middle Bronze Age remains from Jericho (1957-8 excavations), in
         Kenyon, K. M. Excavations at Jericho. II. London, pp. 685-93.
      39 Kelso, A. J. and Armelagos, G. (1963). Nutritional factors as selective
         agencies in the determination of ABO blood group frequencies, South¬
         western Lore, 29, pp. 44-8.
      40 Otten, C. M. (1967). On pestilence, diet, natural selection, and the
         distribution of microbial and human blood group antigens and anti¬
         bodies, Current Anthropology, 8, pp. 209-26.
      41 Shatin, R. (1967). The transition from food-gathering to food-production
         in evolution and disease, Vitalstoffe Zivilisationskrankheiten, 12, pp. 104-
         7-_
      42 Livingstone, F. B. (1962). Anthropological implications of the Sickle¬
         cell gene distribution in West Africa, in Ashley Montague, M. F. (ed.)
         Culture and the Evolution of Man. New York.
      43 Coon, C. S. (1959). Race and ecology in Man, Cold Spring Harbour
         Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 24, pp. 153-9.
      44 Dobyns, H. F. (1966). Estimating aboriginal American population,
         Current Anthropology, 7, pp. 395-449.
                                             Early dietary variation    545

45 Brues, A. (1959). The spearman and the archer—an essay on selection in
   body build, Amer. Anthrop., 61, pp. 457-61.
46 I am most grateful to Professor N. A. Barnicot, for comments pertinent to
   the final preparation of this paper. Miss Theya Molleson kindly hunted
   out certain references, and Mrs. Irene Copeland continued her secretarial
   support.
         JOHN YUDICIN

         Archaeology and the nutritionist


The domestication of plants and animals is concerned with man going into the
business of producing his food instead of hunting and gathering his food. The
nutritionist is interested in this for three practical reasons:
  1 The “ideal” diet. The first is that to know what man ate before he
invented agriculture is to know his diet during the millions of years during
which he adapted to a particular choice of foods. We may thus assume that
this choice represents something like his “ideal” diet, and might well form
the basis of the advice that the nutritionist is asked to give in formulating diets
for health.
  2 Diets and diseases of civilization. The second reason for the nutritionist’s
interest is that he needs to know what the pre-agricultural diet was in order to
ascertain the dietary changes produced by the introduction of agriculture. A
study of these changes may possibly then afford a clue as to the causes of
diseases that appear to be associated with civilization.
  3 Factors determining food choice. The third reason for wishing to know
what dietary changes followed man’s domestication of plants and animals is
that these may give clues as to the factors that determine man’s choice of
food. We are still not very knowledgeable as to why people eat some foods
and reject other foods, and a study of dietary changes with time can provide
useful pointers.
  We have a long way to go before we can answer all the questions I have just
raised. In the meantime, let me summarize my own views that relate to the
three general problems I have outlined1. Many of these views are no doubt
based on slender or non-existent evidence, or even on quite incorrect assump¬
tions.



         i The “ideal” diet

As I understand it, man and his immediate ancestors, emerging as a distinctive
species two million years ago and perhaps much longer, were hunters as well
as gatherers of food. Their diets contained an unknown but not insignificant
548   Part V Human nutrition      yudkin

proportion of animal foods. Being omnivorous, he was not so likely to suffer
from food shortages as those species that had very restricted diets. But it
does look as if, when conditions allowed, his diet contained quite a lot of meat
and in some circumstances also quite a lot of fish. It seems that he was not
nearly so fussy as we are today in the sorts of meat that he ate; he did not
insist on fillet steak, but polished off the liver, kidneys and the entrails with
relish. Nor was he averse from chewing the cartilage and soft bones, and
breaking open the bones for marrow.
  In terms of its major constituents, then, his diet when the hunting was good
was relatively rich in protein, reasonably rich in fat, and not very rich in
carbohydrate. It would be poorer in protein and fat, and richer in carbohy¬
drate especially starch, at those times when he was not very successful in
hunting or scavaging for food.
  It seems a reasonable assumption that the particular ecological niche in
which man found himself some 9000 years ago was one to which he had
become pretty well adapted, and that this adaptation included the foods that
he chose to eat. On this basis, the nutritionist would suggest that a diet that
contained a fairly high proportion of meat would be basically the diet most
suitable for human animals. This is supported by a consideration of recent
changes in diet. We know2 that once man began to produce his food rather
than hunt or gather it, his total food supplies increased and these were
mostly the high-yielding vegetable foods rich in starch. As a result, his
numbers grew and it soon became impossible for him to revert to the low-
yielding method of hunting and gathering. Thus, from some 9000 years ago
until the recent industrial revolution, agricultural man has in general been
unable to eat anything more than small quantities of meat. However, when
there is no limitation imposed by economic factors, or cultural factors such as
vegetarianism, people tend to have a diet that contains quite a high proportion
of meat.
  I have been talking about man’s food preferences. The fact is of course that,
if his preferred foods are not available, man can eat from a wide range of
animal and vegetable foods. One feature of man’s inherently omnivorous
habit, incidentally, is that it enabled him to live in a wide range of environ¬
ments, in which he found and later produced a very wide range of foods. It is
this factor more than any other that made it possible for man to inhabit
ultimately almost every corner of the world.
  A second point of interest is that the adoption of the largely vegetable diet
that followed the development of agriculture 8000 or so years ago was only
possible because man had much earlier learnt how to make and control fire.
Unless they are cooked, most of the cereal and root crops would have been
indigestible except in very small quantities; some like cassava would even
have been poisonous.
                                          Archaeology and the nutritionist    549



      2 Diet and diseases of civilization

If these considerations relating to man’s “ideal” diet are correct, we must
conclude that the present-day diets of the majority of mankind differ con¬
siderably from the ideal diet. The changes began only 9000 years ago3, at
most only one half of 1% of man’s existence as a distinct species—and it is
unlikely that he has become completely adapted to these changes.
  One dietary consequence of the introduction of agriculture was, as we saw,
a change in the proportion of the major constituents—a fall in the proportion
of protein and fat, and a rise in the proportion of carbohydrate. In addition,
cereals and especially root crops, as well as being relatively short in protein,
may in varying degrees also be short in some of the B vitamins. Thus, maize is
short of nicotinic acid which is needed to prevent pellagra; man learnt to mill
and polish rice thus reducing the content of thiamine which is needed to
prevent beri beri. Moreover, all cereals contain phytate, the consumption of
which conduces to rickets as it interferes with the absorption of calcium. To
this we may add the suggestion that the agricultural diet no doubt contains
less calcium than the pre-agricultural diet, in which man ate the soft bones of
•animals and fish.
   If, as I suggested earlier, it is reasonable to assume that nutritional disease
was rare during the two million years or more when man was consuming the
diet to which he had become adapted, we are entitled to say that widespread
nutritional diseases such as protein deficiency (the commonest nutritional
deficiency), beri-beri, pellagra, riboflavin deficiency and rickets stem largely
from the dietary change brought about by the neolithic revolution.
  As well as producing nutritional deficiency, the neolithic diet high in
carbohydrate is more likely to produce dental caries. It is widely believed that
dental caries began to be prevalent after man took to his carbohydrate-rich
agricultural diet4. As Brothwell5 says, however, there is still a great deal to be
done in order to determine, for example, the relationship between dental
caries and the adoption of diets based largely on animal breeding on the one
hand, or on cereal production on the other hand.
  A second direct consequence of the introduction of agriculture is, I believe,
due to the new foods themselves, rather than to the nutrients they contain.
What I am suggesting is that there is evidence that man is still not completely
adapted to the consumption of cereals or cows’ milk, two foods that were
consumed in very much smaller quantities if at all in preneolithic times. For
it is a fact that the commonest allergies found in the countries where there
have been most studies are allergies to wheat and to milk.
550     Part V Human nutrition     yudkin




       3 Factors determining food choice

There has been a great deal of research, and even more armchair discussion,
as to why people eat what they do. I believe that most of the theories are
inadequate in the light of what we know about nutritional requirements. My
own views are best set out in a series of propositions:

(a) The cells of all species of animals require the same chemical substances
      for their continuing life and function.
(ib) Many of these substances can be made from other substances, but there
      remain some forty or fifty that the animal needs to have provided for it in
      the forms in which it uses them. Different species require these in roughly
      the same proportion.
(c) In most species, all of these essential substances must be supplied by the
      diet, though there are some species in which a few of the essential sub¬
      stances may be supplied by microbial synthesis in the gut.
(d) Species vary very much in the foods that they consume. Some animals are
      almost entirely carnivorous, some herbivorous, some omnivorous. And
      within these groups, some species choose quite different diets from others,
      and some are much more restricted than others.
(e) But since all species require the same, or nearly the same, substances in
      their diets, and in roughly the same proportion, it follows that it cannot
      be the nutrient composition of the foods that determine that they shall or
      shall not be consumed by different species.

  These considerations lead to the suggestion that there are properties of
shape, colour, smell, taste and texture that cause a particular species to
choose particular foods. For these properties, I use the word palatability, in a
perhaps excessively wide sense. It is axiomatic that, during the course of
evolution, a developing species must have continued to choose foods that gave
it the required nutrients, but it chose foods within its own ecological niche
that had particular attributes of palatability for that species.
  As far as man is concerned, it appears that the foods that are most palatable
are of two sorts. The first are those with the texture, savoury taste and other
qualities of meat; the second are those with the smell and colour, and sweet,
acid and aromatic taste of fruits. It is possible too that he likes to intersperse
these with rather neutral foods such as seeds, shoots, leaves and roots, which
prevent the palate becoming excessively jaded with the strong tastes of the
other foods. If this is so, it would suggest that the diet that to developing
man was most attractive was a diet of meat, fruit and some roots, seeds and
leaves. These would have given him—as it were incidentally—all the protein,
vitamins, mineral elements and calories that he required. When he ate what he
liked, he ate what he needed.
  As I suggested earlier, this hypothesis that palatability is a major deter-
noble:     a “Peace” and “War” panels of the Standard of Ur (see p. 486).
           b   Copper chariot from Tell Agrab drawn by four onagers (see p.

               486)'                                                           ...        ,
{Both these illustrations are reproduced by courtesy of the Trustees of the British Museum)

                                                                                    Plate i
Plate ii




           Smith:   The forcible feeding of cranes (Tomb of Mereruka at Saqqara (Dyn. VI) (see p. 309).
                 <u
           <J 43
                 4—*
           w
                C+H
           o o
           o\
           w
           i—i    <L)
                  >
                  *h
           u 3
             r\ 00
           K^>
           IZ> .S
           <->  CJ
           OS
           d a
           Q &
           ri      O-i
           S «
            d H
            (L) HH
            ^ C/D
           rl u
           P-1     GO


           +-»^ OJ
                   C/3
                 fH
            o B
           's
            o 'S

           43 'O u
             O o
           • J3  cj
                03 ^
             <3 c3 Oh
             cj    cj


             £ -JL (N
             O      5-H   hH
           *rj -M
               <L) _T^
             d      03    O
             j J W)
             w ^          o3
            4-<     ..    CJ
            HH     HH *3
            HH*
            ^ ou
            ^   oj (L)
               l-H °
            CO
            dJ hU 4-»
                   3
            gfi.a
            S d t5
            ^ d C
              o  ^T3
              03
               i e s
             o3
            43 o -d
            Oh

              w
              o
              PS
              Q




Plate hi
Sturtevant: a      Plantation slaves preparing cassava bread in the Lesser
               Antilles about 1660. 5: Peeling manioc roots; 6: Pulping
               the roots with a rotary grater; 7: Pulping the roots with the
               old-style grater; 8: Grated pulp in bags in press; 9: Sifting
               flour; 10: Cooking cassava on griddle; 13: Cassava cakes
               drying. (From J. B. du Tertre (1667). Histoire generate des
               Antilles . . . , 2, facing p. 419) (see p. 182.)




Owen: b    Domestic ferret (from Gesner, C. (1551). Historiae Animalium)
           (see p. 492.)


Plate iv
Dixon:   a Gold hawk’s head from Hierakonpolis, Upper Egypt (from
           Schaefer, H. and Andrae, W. (1925). Die Kunst des Alten
           Orients. Berlin, pi. 234 top) (see p. 137.)
         b Chick peas (see p. 137).                       Plate v
Ryder: a   Sample of Scythian sheepskin from Pazirik in central Asia dated
           about 400 b.c.
           (from Ryder, M. L. (1964). Fleece evolution in domestic sheep, Nature,
           Lond. 204, pp. 555-9) (see p. 501)




Clutton-Brock: b        Canis spp. from the Jericho Tell.
                     (?) No. 0.6.21J. Pottery Neolithic. Right mandibular
                     ramus with large compacted teeth: young animal, (??)
                     No. D.5.3C. Pottery Neolithic. Lower left carnassial
                     tooth. Described byZeuner1 (???) No. M.15.10A. Proto-
                     neolithic. Anterior portion of left horizontal ramus of a
                     canid mandible: the bone is charred: the alveoli of the
                     premolar teeth are much displaced (see pp. 338, 340)
             1 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.

Plate vi
d
    brothwell: a   Palate of Rhodesian Man, showing severe caries; b and
               c X-rays of part of the cortical tissue of early femora from
               Jericho, showing marked differences in density; d faecal
               residue from a medieval English site, showing plant tissue and
               eggs of Trichuris sp., Ascaris sp. and Dicrocoeliwn dendriticum
               (X 200, preparation by courtesy of Dr. A. Pike) (see pp. 532,
               537. 539-)
                                                                  Plate vii
                                  CmS


Zohary : Cultivated and wild emmer and wild einkorn (see p. 49).




Plate viii
                                          Archaeology and the nutritionist    551


minant in an animal’s food choice, and that in man the most palatable foods
are meat and fruit, is supported by the dietary trends that occur when there
are no economic or other restrictions on man’s food choice. It is a basic
nutritional concept that increasing affluence in man is associated with an
increased consumption of the highly palatable meat and fruit, and a decreased
consumption of the less palatable cereals and roots.
  Finally, I would like to bring this story up to date, although we now have
to deal with recent history rather than prehistory. I have said that a major
revolution in man’s diet occurred when he invented agriculture, and this has
been the thesis of my paper so far. But a second revolution in man’s diet
occurred with the introduction of industrialization, and the development of
science and technology, some 200 years ago. This had two tremendous
effects on man’s food, with results that were I believe to some extent of
opposite effects on man’s nutritional health.
  The first effect was the development of methods of food production,
storage, preservation and distribution. This made much more food available
to the industrialized countries with their increasing wealth, and made it
available too entirely independently of geography and of season. As a result,
for the first time in the story of man or indeed of any species of animal, there
is now a small but significant proportion of the world’s human population
that can look forward to living their whole fives without ever really being
hungry. In this way, because of the availability of more food, and especially
more of the more nutritious foods like meat and fruit, the industrial revolution
could be expected to have produced nothing but an improvement in man’s
nutritional health.
  But in addition to this, science and technology have made it possible to
separate the two associated but distinct factors of palatabifity and nutrition. It
is no longer true that when you eat what you like, you eat what you need. It
will no doubt soon be possible to produce something that has the appearance,
smell, taste and texture of a grilled steak, but with neither protein nor
vitamins. More important, it is already possible to produce a drink that has
the appearance, smell and taste of fruit juice, but with no vitamin C nor any
other nutritional quality except the dubious qualities of sugar. Chiefly for
technological reasons, it happens that we can produce sugar very cheaply, and
with it make a very wide range of highly palatable foods and drinks. The effect
of this is to increase our sugar consumption from 4 lb. a year in the middle of
the eighteenth century to 120 lb. or more nowadays.
  I have elsewhere produced evidence that this very large consumption of
sugar plays a part in causing not only dental caries, but also obesity, diabetes,
peptic ulceration, some skin diseases, and above all coronary thrombosis6. I
might add here, as a final comment, that it was chiefly a consideration of pre¬
historic man’s diet with its content of animal fat that more than any other
single factor led me to dispute the widely held view that coronary thrombosis
might be caused by this dietary constituent.
19—OOP A A   *   *
552   Part V Human nutrition       yudkin


  The industrial revolution then has made available to a substantial number of
people, on the one hand a better range of nutritionally desirable foods than has
ever before been possible, and on the other hand nutritionally undesirable
foods that previously were consumed in much smaller quantities. For these
people, the result has been simultaneously the almost complete elimination of
nutritional deficiency disease, and the production in virtually epidemic form
of a range of diseases that were previously quite rare. “The malnutrition of
affluence” is more than a striking catch-phrase.



      Notes
      1 Yudkin, J. (1962). Nutrition in the affluent society, Mem.s and Procs.
        Manchester Lit. and Philos. Soc., 104; Yudkin, J. (1963). Nutrition and
        palatability with special reference to obesity, myocardial infarction, and
        other diseases of civilization. Lancet, I, p. 1335; Yudkin, J. (1964).
        Patterns and trends in carbohydrate consumption and their relation to
        disease, Proc. Nutr. Soc., 23, p. 149; Yudkin, J. (1967). Evolutionary and
        historical changes in dietary carbohydrates, Am.J. clin. Nutr., 20, p. 108.
      2 e.g. Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100.
      3 As pointed out by Hawkes, J. G., this volume, pp. 17-29.
      4 Bibby, B. G. (1961). Cariogenicity of foods, J. Amer. med. Ass., 177, p.
        316.
      5 Brothwell, D. R., this volume, pp. 531-45.
      6 Yudkin, J. (1963). ibid.; Yudkin, J. (1964). Dietary fat and dietary sugar
        in relation to Ischaemic Heart Disease and Diabetes, Lancet, II, p. 4;
        Yudkin, J. (1964). Levels of dietary sucrose in patients with Occlusive
        Atherosclerotic Disease, Lancet, II, p. 6; Yudkin, J. (1967). Sugar and
        Coronary Thrombosis, New Scientist, 16th March; Yudkin, J. (1967).
        Why blame sugar ?, Chemistry and Industry, 2nd Sept.
Conclusion
      STUART PIGGOTT

      Conclusion


After a seminar of such complexity and concentration, an elaborate summing-
up would be virtually impossible to prepare. I shall therefore limit my
remarks to some aspects of early animal and plant domestication in a region
where I know the material at first hand, namely Europe. Ne supra crepidam
sutor judicaret: I will take Pliny’s advice and not look beyond my Danubian
shoe-last celt.
• Conventionally, within the ecological modification of the Three Ages
model of prehistory, the appearance of agricultural economies (in the widest
sense) is equated with the beginning of a phase (of something) known as
“neolithic”. I have put this in rather laboured terms to make what I think is as
valid point: “neolithic” is the verbalization of a mental construct designed, as
we are currently using it, to accommodate certain archaeological data in a
way in which they will appear to have significance when viewed in terms of a
more general model in which the determinants are changes in technology
and subsistence-economics in combination. It is not Lubbock’s original
“neolithic” of 1865, and hardly Childe’s of the 1930s; it will surely not be that
of the next generation of prehistorians, who may well have modified it beyond
recognition if indeed they find an intellectual necessity to retain it at all.
Much of our discussion has, in a sense, been either writing Notes Towards
the Definition of the Neolithic, or expressing doubts about its existence.
  It would seem to me that a significant difference is perceptible in the socio¬
economic changes inferred from archaeological evidence in this context in the
Near East, and those in Europe. The cardinal problems in Western Asia are
those of transition among indigenous societies; in Europe, those of the intro¬
duction and adoption of an already formed cultural complex in which the
domestication of animals and plants, if the decisive economic factor, was not
the total content of the new pattern. The European prehistorian has there¬
fore to consider the circumstances in which not only the techniques of
domestication were acquired or disseminated, but in which an alien culture
was accepted and adopted. The new social artifacts are expressed not only in
the modification of inert substances as tools (in the widest sense, in which a
stone or pottery bowl is a tool), nor in that of living organisms—domesticated
556   Conclusion   piggott


plants and animals—but also in the more subtle and more profound modifica¬
tions of belief and behaviour which would alter the very structure of society.
  Of the intrusive nature of the first agriculturally based economies in
Europe there seems on the present evidence little doubt. The absence of the
necessary potential cultigens and domesticates such as cereals or ovicaprids in
Europe as opposed to Western Asia is a commonplace, even if it has minor
exceptions; the archaeological evidence demonstrates the introduction of a
whole range of novelties in material culture in the earliest neolithic settle¬
ments. The fact that a secondary domestication of locally indigenous cattle or
pigs could, or did take place, does not alter the intrusive character of the
initial impact of the new group of closely knit cultural traditions reflected in
the archaeological evidence for village settlements on an economic basis of
mixed farming. It was not simply a process whereby hunting and gathering
peoples adopted the sporadic cultivation of plants in the manner of much of
the garden agriculture of the New World, nor the intermittent and partial
domestication such as takes place with reindeer-herding communities, nor the
idea of permanent settlements such as Lepenski Vir. The evidence from East
Europe brought forward by Dr. Tringham in her paper to this seminar, and
more directly in a study of the relationship of the latest Mesolithic to the
earliest Neolithic in South-east and Central Europe1, makes it clear that no
initial acculturation of indigenous hunting and gathering communities by
contact with those with agricultural economies can be detected. In other
words, we are dealing not with animal and plant domestication as a technical
increment adopted by cultures already established in East and Central
Europe, but with the introduction, maintenance and comparatively rapid
development and dissemination of a new and alien tradition, in a form
sufficiently cohesive and viable as not only to establish itself, but to make the
necessary adjustments which would allow of its pushing the initial domesti¬
cates beyond their natural climatic and geographical habitat, far to the West
and North of Europe.
  A few years ago I tentatively and briefly put forward a thesis that in
antiquity it might be thought possible to perceive two types of society
characterized respectively by their acceptance or rejection of circumstances
leading to technological change. With such change, which alone can be
documented by archaeological evidence, would go the accompanying social
phenomenon, susceptible to perception by history alone, of changes in
ideas, a flexibility rather than a rigidity of tradition, and a willingness to
think empirically and if need be unconventionally. For such societies,
developing such a character for themselves or welcoming the adoption of new
ideas from outside, I suggested the term innovating; for those opposed to
such disruptive processes within, or influences upon, their long established
economies, that of conserving2. I was subsequently encouraged in my belief
that such a distinction might have a certain validity by the discovery that the
same concept had in fact been demonstrated at length in a quite different
                                                              Conclusion   557

context, that of historical England before the Industrial Revolution, by
an American anthropologist, Professor Margaret Hodgen, a dozen years
earlier3.
  She examined the sociological assumptions which, “isolating technology
from its matrix in the economic or social system, endow it with irresistible
advance”, and characterizing these philosophies of history as the “darling
vice” of the nineteenth century, with roots in a long antecedent past of
simplistic evolutionary thinking, criticizes them for separating “the innovator
from his innovation ... the agent of change from the fact of change”. She
contrasts those communities which have been receptive of innovation with
those who have opposed it, and, summing up her detailed and precisely dated
sequence of technological change and development in an historic context,
notes how “the technologically new in England has emerged at particular
epochs in the historical past under definite geographical conditions and in
historical correlation with a fundamental break in custom, the intrusion of
strangers”.
   It seems to me that the concept of innovators and conservers may be as
usefully employed in thinking about the beginning of animal and plant
domestication, or the transmission of the new cultural complex once achieved,
as in historically documented situations. And perhaps it will not be out of
place here to suggest that another thesis demonstrated by Professor Hodgen
may be of value to us as prehistorians. She comments on the creation in pre¬
industrial England of centres or regions of technological adaptability and a
ready acceptance of change. She notes “not only the efficacy of new blood
in bringing about industrial changes, but the fertility of the old cultural
ground that had long before received enrichment from foreign craftsmen”,
areas in which “after long years of experience in accepting changes in tools,
an ancient rigidity of agricultural custom had been replaced by relative
cultural elasticity”, where “die obscure zeal of nameless pioneers linked with
the presence of alien craftsmen . . . had ‘broken the cake’ of custom”.
  May one of the secondary effects of the adoption of agricultural techniques
or their implantation in partibus by newcomers, have been not only the
dramatic circumstances of the emergence of literacy and civilization in
Western Asia, but the creation of areas far afield favourable to subsequent
technological innovadons of a quite different kind, such as the precocious
initiation and development of non-ferrous metallurgy in Eastern Europe?
And, although impossible to document by archaeological means, should not
the necessity of accepting new and changing mental concepts be reflected in a
corresponding enlargement and sophistication of language among these
innovating societies ?
  I have strayed from the primary matter of the seminar and must return.,
The papers submitted fall into two groups, those dealing widi methodology
and those with inferences from the data that sound methodology can alone
558   Conclusion   piggott


provide. More than one speaker dealt with the objective criteria our inter¬
disciplinary studies demand, and some very real problems were brought to
our notice. It is perhaps worth while enlarging on one aspect whereby an
element of uncertainty is introduced into our interpretations: it was touched
on more than once but will bear re-statement. Our basic evidence for early
agriculture is provided by animal and plant remains in archaeological con¬
texts, as organic artifacts side-by-side with the products of material culture
in inert substances. Now in settlements or in burials we are dealing with
socially determined situations—Childe’s “fossilized behaviour”—and as
archaeologists we should recognize that in these contexts we are not dealing
with random assemblages representative of the whole nutritional spectrum of
omnivorous man, but with part of the material evidence for human
behaviour.
  This is of course patently obvious in the case of evidence from burials:
what goes into a grave is subject to selection not only in terms of the range of
objects available within a given culture, but in terms of religious and there¬
fore social approval. Ignorant of the religion, and informed only inferentially
of the social structure of a prehistoric community, the choice may seem to us
meaningless or even capricious. I would remind you in passing that the
archaeological phrase “grave-goods” itself conceals an unverifiable assump¬
tion as to motive and purpose, rather than demonstrates an inference. But
whatever the irrecoverable reasons for the placing of objects in a grave, their
presence is far from being the product of chance. They have been selected
according to conventions of which we are ignorant, and this limitation of
choice will operate on food remains as much as for pots or weapons, clothing
or ornaments. We cannot take them as representing the whole nutritional
potential of the culture of which they are a part.
  It is perhaps less often realized that this may apply to settlement debris as
well. But food refuse is the product of meals, and cooking, eating and drinking
are essentially social activities with complex rules, conventions, tabus and
prohibitions unrelated to nutrition as such. Religious dictates take no account
of a nice balance of proteins and carbohydrates; Custom, not Calory is King.
The Jewish and Muslim prohibition of pork is an obvious example, but what
for that matter are we to make of the statement in Pausanias that, in the
gross pork-eating Celtic world, it was tabu in Galatian Pesinus ? There were
Celtic tabus against fish: these and their modern counterparts may be related
to allergies, but throughout prehistory there must have been innumerable
irrational restrictions on diet comparable with those so abundantly docu¬
mented in recent ethnography. Certain parts of animals may be accepted as
food, others rejected: we need look no further than our own society to be
reminded for instance of ambivalent attitudes towards what we uncompro¬
misingly call Offal, and American cook-books more delicately designate
Variety Meats.
  The more advanced modes of cooking which became at first necessary and
                                                                   Conclusion    559


later desirable in the preparation of the diet available to the first agricul¬
turalists inevitably affected material culture, and the development of pottery¬
making techniques must have a primary relationship to the preparation,
storage and service of forms of food and drink not hitherto exploited.
Archaeologists on occasion get hooked on pots and take ceramic trips, forget¬
ting that one should not rate the container above the contents, the stew-pot
over the stew. Food and drink may be perishable imponderables beyond
reach of even inferential recovery, but non-nutritional problems may be
illuminated in terms of cooking processes, as Rausing has recently suggested
in the instance of the composite archer’s bow which needs animal glue and
prepared sinew which cannot be made except by prolonged boiling in a vessel
of pottery or metal. From this essentially culinary fact he argues that the
invention and development of this type of bow can only have taken place
among peoples employing such means of food production, rather than in the
aceramic contexts of most hunters and gatherers4.
   The last point I wish to make is that enshrined in a cliche so many of us
have turned to when setting examination papers on neolithic Europe. Ex
oriente lux, or le mirage orientale ? An antithesis on paper, has it any solution
. in practice ? It is in miniature (and perhaps on a larger scale than that) a
crucial test of the diffusionist model of the relationship between the earliest
agriculture in Asia and Europe, and our seminar has suggested that the light
from the east is not an illusion, but may even be a fairly coherent beam. The
desire to believe it was a mirage led Salomon Reinach to support the fantastic
cause of the Glozel forgeries in the 1920s, and so to find pre-literate literacy
in neolithic France. If we are spared such excesses today, do not let us con¬
gratulate ourselves too rapidly before remembering the emotive attempts of
 more than European people of late to discover an indigenous origin for
 agriculture within their own territories, and the keen competition for a
 national aceramic neolithic; the Tartaria tablets and their interpretation form
 a problem quite as interesting to students of human psychology as to pre¬
 historians. But despite the nonsense, one thing does seem to stand up to the
 assaults of reasoned scholarship. With perhaps minor exceptions, Europe
 appears still to maintain its indebtedness for the initiation of agriculture to
 peoples, crops and herds from the lands across the Hellespont and beyond
 the Aegean. It is an old debt, standing now for some seven or eight thousand
years.



         Notes
         1 Tringham, R. (1968). A preliminary study of the early neolithic and latest
           mesolithic blade industries in southeast and central Europe, in Coles,
           J. M. and Simpson, D. D. A. (eds.) Studies in Ancient Europe. Leicester,
           pp. 45-70.
560   Conclusion   piggott


      2 Piggott, S. (1965). Ancient Europe: from the Beginnings of Agriculture to
        Classical Antiquity. Edinburgh and Chicago.
      3 Hodgen, M. T. (1952). Change and History: a Study of Dated Distribution
        of Technological Innovations in England. Viking Fund Pubs, in Anthro¬
        pology, 18, New York.
      4 Rausing, G. (1967). The Bow: Some Notes on its Origin and Development.
        Lund & Bonn. pp. 145 ff.
      INDEX

      General

Aardvark 311                                 Apocynaceae 17
Abalone (see also Mollusc) 480, 482          Apodemus sylvaticus (see also Mouse) 211
Abies cilicica (see also Fir) 38             Apple (see also Malus) 201, 205
Acacia 103                                     Crab 201-6
Acetobacter 466                              Arab 250, 485
Ackee 179                                    Arachis (see also Groundnut, Peanut)
Acorn (see also Oak, Quercus) 78-9, 205,          427-41
     366-7                                     africana 429
Adansonia digitata (see also Baobab) 331-5     asiatica 429, 433, 437
Addax (see also Antelope) 309, 312            fastigiata 431
Aegilops (see also Wheat) 56, 61, 64, 82,      hypogaea 179, 400, 427-41
     88-90, 145, 152, 155-7, 162-3             monticola 428
  cylindrica 64                                nambyquarae 432
  longissima 64                                pusilla 427
  speltoides 64, 162                           villosa 428
  squarrosa 60-3, 65, 163, 174, 176            villosulicarpa 432
  triuncialis 64                               vulgaris 431
  variabilis 64                              Arawak 178, 185, 422, 436-7
Ahaggar Tuareg (see Tuareg)                  Arracacha (see also Arracacia) 10, 23
Akkadian 488                                 Arracacia (see also Arracacha) 23
Alcelaphus 105                                 xanthorrhiza xo
Aloes aloes (see also Deer) 102, 390         Arrowroot (see also Canna, Maranta) 10,
Alder (see also Alnus) 113                        178, 184-9, 406
Allium (see also Onion) 356-8                  Fiji (see also Tacca) 10
Allouia (see also Calathea, Lleren) 10       Artemisia (see also Sagebrush) xix, 77, 112
Almond (see also Prunus) 38, 84, 86, 90        herba-alba 38, 40
Alnus (see also Alder) 112-13                Aryan 473
Alpaca 254, 366                              Asclepiadaceae 17
Amalaka (see also Myrobalan, Phyllanthus)    Aspergillus 466
     326                                     Ass 102, 471-2, 485
Amanita 466                                  Assyrian 485
Amaranth 447                                 Astragalus (see also Vetch) 82, 88, 155
Amber canes (see also Sorghum) 400           Asturian 480
Ammotragus (see also Sheep) 372              Aurochs (see also Bos, Cattle) 83-4, 86, 95,
Amorphophallus campanulatus 406                   222, 224-5, 227, 277-94
‘Amuq’ 150-1, 154; *57; 166, 168, 374-5      Australian Aborigine xviii
Ananas comosus (see also Pineapple) 179      Australopithecus (see also Homo, Paran-
Andropogon sorghum (see also Kaoliang,            thropus, Telanthropus, Zinjanthropus)
     Millet) 325; 399                             527
Animal keeping 125-6, 219-21, 307, 310         africanus 527
Anopheles maculatus 541                        boisei 527
Antelope (see also Addax, Oryx) 103, 312       robustus 527
Anu (see also Tropaeolum) 10, 23             Avena (see also Oat) 56, 82, 88, 157, 160,
Ape 525                                           166, 356-7
  Chimpanzee 526                               barbata 158
  Gorilla 526                                  byzantina 154
562    General Index

Avena—continued                              Bos—continued
 fatua 158                                     gaurus 105
  ludoviciana 154, 157, x66                    indicus 318-20
  sativa 154, 158, 166                         namadicus 281
  sterilis 52, 56                              primigenius 105, 270, 277-94, 319, 364,
  strigosa 166                                      - ,
                                                 389 90 517
Avetra 406                                     taurus 74, 271, 277-94, 372, 386, 389-90
Aztec 448, 533                                 taurus longifrons 351
Azukia 452                                     taurus primigenius 279
                                               urus minutus 279
Baboon (see also Papio) 310-13, 526-7        Brassica juncea (see also Mustard) 324
Babylonian 472                               Breadfruit 179
Bacillus subtilis 466                        Bromus 356
Badener 227
Badger 492
Bajra (see also Millet, Pennisetum) 325
                                                    ,
                                             Broomcom (see also Millet, Panicum) 135,
                                                  153 165, 398
                                               bs3 139-40
Banana 70, 179, 188, 191, 418, 444, 451      Bubalus (see also Buffalo) 287, 309
Banteng (see also Bibos) 287                   bubalus 106
Bantu 252, 333                               Buck, African 106
Baobab (see also Adansonia) 331-5            Buckwheat 68
Baradostian 144, 222                         Budares (see also Nanihot, Manioc) 12
Barley (see also Hordeum) 19-20, 25-6,       Buffalo (see also Bos, Bubalus, Synceros)
     44-5, 47-67, 7i> 74) 80-1, 84, 87-8,         103-5, 312, 318-9
     91, 125, 131-5, 137-40, 150-3,            African 105, 107
     156-7, 160-1, 164-5, 168, 324, 355-7,     Asiatic 106
     368                                       Indian 319
  cultivated 53, 55, 64, 152, 165, 368       Bug-Dniester 382-8
  four-row 134                               Bushman xviii, 75, 528
  it 137-9
  multi-rowed 355                            Cactaceae 17
  six-row 55, 74, 90, 134, 150-1, 153,       Calathea (see also Allouia, Lleren) 10
     155-7, 159, 165, 168, 324                 allouia 178, 184
  two-row 47, 55, 74, 82, 85, 90, 134,         Calluna 112-13
     150-3, 155-9, 163-5, 168, 355-6         Camel (see also Camelus) 101, 208, 250,
  wild 45, 52-9, 61, 63-4, 82, 152-3, 158,        252-3, 255-60, 262, '310, 319-20,
     163-4, 168, 358, 361, 363                    365-6, 506
Basuto 256                                     bactrian 250
Bavenda 258                                  Camelus dromedarius (see also Camel) 320
Bean (see also Phaseolus) 13, 17, 22, 25,    Canavalia 446-7
     139, 179, 358, 446, 451-62, 536-7       Canis (see also Dog) 337-40, 342, 344
  fava 528                                     aureus aureus 338-40
  soya 25, 464, 467                            aureus lupaster 338-40
Bear (see also Ursus) 219, 338, 342, 344      familiaris 74, 214, 369, 386, 389-90
Bedouin 260                                    latrans 214
Bedstraw (see also Galium) 88                  lupus 389-90, 394
Beer 71, 139-40, 464                           lupus arabs 339-40
Ber (see also Jujube, Zizyphus) 326          Canna (see also Arrowroot, Tous-les-mois)
Berberidaceae 17                                  23, 178, 185, 192, 446
Beriberi 533, 549                              indica 186
Betula (see also Birch) 112-13, 116          Cannabis sativa (see also Hemp) 19
Bibos (see also Banteng, Gaur, Ox) 287       Caper (see also Capparis) 86, 90
  sauveli 281                                Capparis (see also Caper) 86
Birch (see also Betula) 111                  Capra (see also Caprinae, Goat) 267, 386,
Bison 7-8,279,287,516-17                       389-90
  bonasus 390                                  hircus 74, 267-8, 364, 371
Blesbok (see also Damaliscus) 105            Capreolus capreolus (see also Roe Deer)
Bombaceae 331                                     236, 389-90
Bombax 333                                   Caprinae (see also Capra, Goat) 267, 269,
Bos (see also Aurochs, Cattle, Ox) 287            272-4
     289-90                                  Capsian 480
  brachyceros 347                            Chukchi 253
  brachyceros europaeus 279                  Capsicum (see also Pepper) 179, 443-50
  bubalis 319                                  annuum 443-4, 446, 448
                                                                                      General Index           563

Capsicum—continued                                           Colocasia (see also Eddo, Taro)       10,406,418
  baccatum 443-4, 446-8                                        esculenta 10
  cardenasii 444                                             Columbus        178, 422, 434, 447
  chinense 443-4, 446-8                                      Compositae 112
  eximium 44/1                                               Connochaetes gnou (see also Wildebeest) 105
 frutescens 444, 446                                         Coprolite      85,    531,   539
  praetermissum 444                                          Coptic    510
  pubescens 443-4, 446, 448                                  Cortaillod      223, 288-90
Caracallae 452                                               Corylus (see also Hazel) 112-13, 116
Cardium (see also Cockle, Mollusc)                   479,      avellana 205
    482                                                      Corynebacterium 466
  edule    481                                               Cotton (see also Gossypium)    6, 25, 97,

Caribou     8                                                    325-7, 446, 451
                                                             Crab (see also Potamon) 77-8, 83, 86, 480
Caries     533~4, 549, 551
Carrot     19                                                Crane    309, 312

Caryophyllaceae          17                                  Cricetus cricetus      389-90

Cassava (see also Manihot, Manioc)               181-3,      Cris    381-8

     188, 190-1, 405, 422, 525, 548                          Crocodile      312-13

Castor fiber      3 89-90                                    Cruciferae 356
Castration       107, 127, 220-1, 235, 240, 242,
                                                             Cucumis melo (see also Gourd) 400
    252, 255, 347                                            Cucurbita (see also Pumpkin, Squash)             443

Cat (see also Felis) 213, 312-13, 319-20,                      moschata 179
     337-8, 343-4                                            Cucuteni       388
  caracal lynx          343                                  Cultigen       9-10, 12, 123, 177, 179, 192
  domestic        343                                        Cuon    340
  Libyan        343                                          Cuttlefish (see also Mollusc)        479-80
  wild     83, 342                                           Cynodon (see also Grass, Bermuda)           88
Cattle (see also Aurochs,            Bos)     7, 19, 69,     Cyperaceae 17
     90,    101,       103-7,    127, 208, 214,      220,
     222-3, 225-8, 232, 234, 237, 240, 242,                  Dama dama (see also Deer) 238-9
     248, 250-1, 253, 255-9, 262, 266-7,                     Damaliscus dorcas (see also Blesbok) 105
     269-74,       277-94,        312,   318-21,     333,    Date (see also Phoenix)   91, 139-40, 252,
     347-53, 361, 364, 366-7, 372-3, 375,                        325-7
     384, 387-8, 394, 453, 495, 5i6-7, 528,                  Daubentonia (see also Lemur)          526
     556                                                     Dead Sea Scrolls         503-5
  brachyceros           221, 266, 270, 279                   Deer     (see  also   Alces, Cervus, Dama,
  domestic        73, 83-4, 277-94, 373, 387                        Hydropotes, Pseudaxis, Rangifer, Roe¬
  iw3     308-9, 312                                                buck) 91, 102, 117, 235, 237, 240, 333,
  longifrons       221                                              365, 37i
  ng     308, 312                                              Elk    102
  range     104-5                                              Fallow       237-9, 312
  wild     223,271,277-94,373,381                              Hornless river         394
  zebu     103, 318-19                                         Red     95, 232, 237
Cedar (see also Cedrus) 38                                     Reindeer        7-8,   102, 237-40, 251, 253,
Cedrus libani (see also Cedar) 38                                   255, 258-9, 366, 556
Cervus elaphus (see also Deer) 389-90                          Roe     232, 235-6
Chariot 473-7, 485-8                                           Spotted       394
Chenopodiaceae 40, 112, 146                                  Dentalium (see also Mollusc)       479
Chestnut        400                                          Digging stick        124-5,179,411
Chickpea        (see    also    Bengal   Gram,      Cicer)   Dikdik    104

     137, 326-7                                              Dinka    259
Chlorella 466                                                Dioscorea (see also Yam) 10, 405-25
Chondrus crispus 466                                           abyssinica 420
Cicer (see also Bengal gram, Chickpea) 356,                    alata 409-10, 412, 414-18, 420-1
     358                                                       batatas 409
  arietinum        137, 326, 328, 357                          bulbifera   407, 409-10, 412, 416-1

Club-rush (see also Scirpus)             8r                         420-1
Cockle (see also Cardium, Mollusc) 479-80                      cayenensis 409-10, 419-21
Cocoa (Cacao)           422, 448                               colocasiifolia 409-10, 419
Coconut      332                                               convolvulacea 410, 422
Cocoyam (see also Xanthosoma)                 406              dumetorum 409-10, 419-20
Coleus (see also Kaffir Potato) 10                             esculenta 409-10, 412, 415-18, 420-1
Colobidae (see also Monkey) 526                                hamiltonii 414-15
564      General Index

Dioscorea—continued                                           Equus (see also Horse, Zebra)              272, 389-90,
  hispida 409-10, 412, 415, 420                                      471-8
 japonica 409-10, 416                                           burchelli 105
  latifolia 409-10, 420                                         caballus 471-2
  nummularia 409-10, 412, 416-17                                hemionus 320
  opposita 409-10, 416                                        Ertebolle       480
  pentaphylla 409-10, 412, 415-17                             Eruca sativa         25
  persimilis 414-15                                           Eskimo        8, 525, 528
  praehensilis 409-10, 419-20                                   Sadlermiut           532
  preussii 409-10, 419                                        Euphaseolus        452
  rotundata 409-10, 419-21
  sansibarensis 409, 4x1
  trifida 410 422  ,                                          Falcon       312
                                                              Felis (see also Cat)
Dog (see also Canis) 7-8, 220, 226-7, 237,                      caracal 343
     239, 254, 318-20, 337-40, 344, 364-6,                      chaus 343
      369-70, 388, 393-4                                        lybica 343
  coyote      214                                               silvestris 389-90
  domestic      74, 214, 312, 338-40, 344, 37°                Fenugreek (see also Pea,             Trigonella)    88
  hunting       102                                           Ferret    489-93
  jackal   312, 320, 337-8, 344, 369                          Ficus (see also Fig)          356-7
  pariah      338                                             Fig (see also Ficus)          139, 252, 357
  wolf 83, 312, 320, 337-40, 342, 344, 361,                   Fir, Cilician (see also Abies)             38
      364, 366-7, 369-70                                      Fish     xviii, 8-9, 27, 77-9, 83-5, 90, 193,
Dolichos (see also Gram, horse)            452                       253, 312, 321, 389, 394, 352, 548-9,
  biflorus 326                                                       558
Donkey     250, 311-2                                         Fixed-plot horticulture             4-6, 13
Duck     84, 3x1-12, 394                                      Flax (see also Linseed, Linum, Oilseed) 22,
Dura (see also Sorghum)            135
                                                                     25-6, 90, 151, 154-6, 167-8, 205, 326,
Dzeitun    381
                                                                     357, 496
                                                              Fowl (see also Gallus)              319, 321, 394
Echinochloa 136                                                 Guinea        228
  colonum 136                                                   Jungle       320
  frumentacea 135                                             Fox     (see    also      Vulpes)    90,   312,    337-8,
Ecosystem       xxiii, 3-15, 23, 106, 111, 361                       341-2, 344, 492
  conuco      13                                                Red     83
  milpa    13                                                 Fraxinus       112, 116
Eddo (see also Colocasia, Taro)            10                 Frog     312

Einkorn (see also        Triticum, Wheat)          47-9,      Fulani       252, 258, 261

      59-60, 80, 90, 131-2, 139,            150,       152,   Fumaria (see also Fumitory)                88

      158, 162, 168, 356, 358                                 Fumitory (see also Fumaria)                88

  cultivated       48, 60, 152
  single-grained         152                                  Galium (see also Bedstraw) 88
  two-grained          152, 160                               Gallus (see also Fowl) 394
  wild     44-5, 48-50, 52-3, 56-7, 59, 61,                   Gaur (see also Bibos, Bos) 105-6, 287
      151-2, 158, 162-3, 168, 355, 361                        Gazelle        80, 83-4, 90-1, 105-6, 239, 267
Elamite    91
                                                                     269, 273, 309, 312, 365
Eland (see also        Taurotragus)      103-6
                                                                Dorcas        311
  Giant    105
                                                                Grant’s       104
Elephant      78, 104, 107, 237, 319-20
                                                              Geraniaceae        17
Eleusine (see also Millet, Ragi)           327
                                                              Ghassoulian        266-74
  coracana      325
                                                              Giraffe      104, 365
Elm (see also       Ulmus) 400
                                                              Goat (see also          Capra, Caprinae)          74, 80,
Emmer (see also        Triticum, Wheat) 25, 44,                      82-5, 87-8, 90, 101, 103-4, 107, 127,
      47, 49,       52-3, 59-6o, 63, 66-7, 74,                       221,     223-8,       237,    239-40,      249-52,
      81-2,     85,    90,   131-4,   138-9,     150-2,
                                                                     254-5, 259, 262, 266, 295-305, 308,
      155-60, 162-3, 168, 174, 355-7
                                                                     311-12,        318-19,       361,   364,    366-8,
  bdt    137-9
                                                                     371-2, 393, 503, 510
  bty    137-8
                                                                Angora        503
  cultivated        49, 52, 60, 63, 150, 152                  Gond      256-7, 259
  wild     45, 49,       51-2,    56-7, 59,      61,    63,   Goose     84,312-3,394
      130-2, 163, 168, 358, 361                               Gossypium (see also Cotton) 325
Emys orbicularis        389-90                                Gourd (see also Cucumis) 400, 446
                                                                                            General Index                  565


Gram (see also Chickpea,                   Cicer, Dolichos,   Hordeum—continued
      Phaseolus)                                                vulgare 47, 53, 55, 64, 74, 159-61, 165,
  bengal       137                                                   324
  black       326                                             Horse (see also Equus)               7, xoi, 214, 220-1,
  canna        326                                                   227-8, 232, 234, 250, 255, 259, 262,
  green       326                                                    312,    319-20,        365^    388,      391,       393-4,
  horse       326                                                    471-8, 485
Gramineae           17, 112-13, 143-8                           Caballine         471
Grass (see also            Cynodon, Medicago, Pha-              Przewalski          394, 471

      laris)                                                    Racing       208

  alfalfa      85, 88                                         Horse-bean (see also             Vida)        154, 167, 357

  bermuda           88                                        House fly 213

  canary       82, 88, 155                                    Hunter-gatherer               xvii-iii,   8-9,       31,    74-6,

  clover       85                                                    93-5, 113, 124-5, 525, 527, 556, 559
  feather       91-2                                          Hurrian       473

  goat-face         56, 61-2, 82, 88, 90                      Hyaena        83, 102, 309, 312

Grind-stone          12                                       Hydropotes inermis             (see    also     Deer,       Roe¬

Groundnut            (see       also    Arachis,   Peanut)           buck)      394

      427-41, 464                                             Hyksos       473

Guanaco        8                                              Hylochoerus meinertzhagen (see also Pig) 105
Gumelnita           388
                                                              Ibex    267, 309, 312
                                                              Ibis   310, 312
Habitat                                                       Impala       104
  Primary          45, 48-50, 52-4, 59, 61-2                  Inca    254, 448
  Secondary (Segetal)                  48-9, 53, 61           Indian,      American            xviii,   94,     113,       116,
Habshi       333-4                                                   178-86, 190-1, 193, 234, 254, 445, 448
Hadza     xviii, 528                                          Indridae (see also Lemur)                 526
Halaf 485                                                     Industrial Revolution             xx
Hallstatt      503                                            Ipomoea batatas (see also Sweet Potato)                         10,
Hansenula          466                                               178, 406, 422
Harappa        317, 319-20, 323-5                             Irrigation      6, 26, 44, 74-6, 85, 89-95, 124,
Hare (see also Lupus)              312                          177, 255, 261
Hartebeest          103-5, io7                                Island-Carib         178, 181-2, 185-6, 422
Hawk      310
  Sparrowhawk               492                               Jemdet Nasr          166, 485
Hazel (see also Corylus)                205, 400              Jomon     397
Hedgehog           83, 257                                    Jujube tree (see also Ber, Xizyphus)                       87
Helix (see also Mollusc, Snail)                                 Indian       326
  aspersa 483                                                 Juniper      38

  hortensis 481
                                                              Kaffir Potato (see also Coleus)                 10
  nemoralis 482
                                                              Kangaroo        365
 pomatia 482-3
                                                              Kaoliang (see also Andropogon)                   399
 salomonica 482
                                                              Karanovo        381-8
Hemp (see also Cannabis) 19-20, 68
                                                              Karim Shahir            168
Heron     312
                                                              Kassite      473
Herpaly       223, 227
                                                              Kazak     250, 252-4, 258-62
Hindu     256
                                                              Kestrel      492
Hippomane manchinella (see also Manchin-
                                                              Kigelia pinnata         333
      eel)    186
                                                              Kite    312-3
Hippopotamus              78,     312-3,    365
                                                              Kodon (see also Paspalum)                 325
Hittite      473                                              Koros     227, 381-8
Hoabhinian           480-1
                                                              Kudu, Lesser            104
Hoe    69,125,411-2
                                                              Kukrek       383
Homo habilis (see also Australopithecus) 527
Hordeum (see also Barley) 358                                 Lactobacillus        466
  agriocrithon 55, 153, 165                                   Lapp     249,      251, 253-5, 258-9, 261
  distichum 74,134,155-8,160,164, 355-6                         Skolt      253
  hexastichum 134                                             Larnian       480
  nudum 356                                                   Lathyrus (see also Pea, Vetchling)                     82, 84,
  spontaneum 44, 52-7, 64, 153, 155-9,                               90, 161
      164-5, 355                                                sativus 326, 536
  tetrastichum            134                                 Leguminosae 17
     566    General Index

     Lemur (see also Daubentonia, Indridae,          Margaritifera margaritifera (see also
          Lepilemur, Microcebus, Phaner) 525-6           Mollusc, Mussel) 481
     Lengyel 227                                     Marmota bobak 389-90
     Lens (see also Lentil) 356                      Marten (see also Martes) 83, 337-8, 342
       culinaris 157-8, 161, 326, 357                Martes (see also Marten)
       esculent a 154, 160, 166                       foina 389-90
       nigricans 154, 161, 166                        martes 342
     Lentil (see also Lens) 19, 74, 84-5, 90, 151,   Masai 250, 252, 254-5
          154-6, 158-9, 161, 166, 168, 326, 357      Maya 12, 533
     Leopard (see also Panthera) 102, 343-4,         Medicago (see also Grass, alfalfa) 82, 87-8,
          487                                             155. 157
     Lepilemur (see also Lemur) 526                  Melampyrum 113, 115
     Lepus europaeus (see also Hare) 389-90          Meles meles 389—90
     Levantina diulfensis (see also Mollusc) 482     Melon 19, 325
     Limpet (see also Mollusc, Patella) 526          Merlin 492
     Linseed (see also Flax, Linum, Oilseed) 74,     Microcebus murinus (see also Lemur) 526
          90, 167, 326                               Millet (see also Andropogon,         Bajra,
     Linum (see also Flax, Linseed, Oilseed)             Eleusine, Panicum, Pennisetum, Ragi,
          356, 358                                        Setaria) 69, 151, 153, 166, 168, 179,
       bienne 90, 167                                    251-2, 325, 327, 398-401, 415
       usitatissimum 154, 167, 326, 357                Bulrush 135, 325
     Lion 102, 312                                     Finger 325
     Littorina littorea (see also Mollusc, Winkle)     Foxtail 398
          481                                          Great 325
—•   Llama 101, 254, 366                               Pearl 135
     Lleren (Liren) (see also Allouia, Calathea)       Proso 135, 165
          10, 184                                      Sorghum 328
     Lobster 480                                     Minoan 479
     Lolium (see also Pea) 82, 88-90, 155, 157-8     Mithan 247-8
     Lung Shan 393-4, 398, 400                       Mollusc (see also under individual species)
     Lutra lutra 389-90                                  77, 126-7, 479-84
     Lynx lynx 389-90                                Monascus 466
                                                     Mongoose 312
     Macroptilium 452                                Monilia 466
     Madder, European (see also Rubia) 325           Monkey 312, 525-6
     Maize (see also Zed) 6, 12-13, 20, 22,          Mother-of-pearl (see also Mollusc) 479
                                                     Mouse (see also Apodetnus, Mus) 213
         24-7, 68, 167, 178, 250, 325, 446, 448,
                                                       Field 211, 213
         453) 456, 525) 533) 549
                                                      House 211, 213
     Mallow (see also Malva) 88, 155
                                                     Mousterian 144, 480
     Malus (see also Apple)
                                                     Mucor 466
      paradisiaca 203
                                                     Murex (see also Mollusc, Winkle) 479
      praecox 203
                                                     Mus musculus (see also Mouse) 211
      sylvestris 201-6
                                                     Mushroom (see also Volvaria) 463-4
     Malva (see also Mallow) 88
                                                      Paddy-straw 464, 466
     Manchineel (see also Hippomane manchin-
                                                     Mussel (see also Mollusc, Mytilus, Spon-
         ella) 186, 189
                                                         dylus) 78-9, 83-6, 179, 479-80, 482,
     Mango 179
                                                         526
     Manihot (see also Cassava, Manioc,               Freshwater 77, 481
         Tapioca, Yuca) 23                           Mustard (see also Brassica) 324
      aipi 179                                        Indian 327
      dulcis 179
                                                     Myrobalan (see also Amalaka, Phyllanthus)
      esculenta 10, 178-9, 422                            326
      palmata 179                                    Mytilus (see aslo Mollusc, Mussel) 482
      utilissima 179                                  edulis 481
     Manioc (see also Budares, Cassava,
         Manihot, Tapioca, Yuca)    10, 70-1,        Nagas 247-8
         125, 178-85, 188-9, I9I-3) 405) 422)        Natufian xxiii-iv, 80, 168, 265, 267, 269,
         444. 447                                        273-4. 339. 362-4. 367
      bitter 12, 179, 182, 192                       Navahos 32
     Maranta (see also Arrowroot) 406                Neanderthal 222
      allouya 184                                    Negro 181-2, 188
      arundinacea 10, 184-7                          Neolithic Revolution xviii, xx, 311, 549
                                                                  General Index      567


Nesokia indica (see also Rat) 91               Pea (see also Fenugreek, Lathyrus, Pisum,
Nubian 364                                          Trigonella) 17, 22, 88, 151, 154, 159,
Nucella (see also Mollusc, Winkle) 479              166, 168, 536
  lapillus 481                                   Field 154, 156, 159, 166, 324, 326
Nuclear Zone 68, 70-1                            Garden 166
Nuer 250-1, 253-4, 256-70                        Grass 74, 90, 326
                                                 Purple 154, 166
Oak (see also Acorn, Quercus) 6, 38, 40,43,    Peacock 228
    483 55-6, 58, 76, 79, 116, 163, 363        Peanut (see also Arachis, Groundnut) 179,
  Deciduous 38, 45, 53                              429, 435, 447
  Persian 38                                   Pecten maximus (see also Mollusc, Scallop)
Oat (see also Avena) 19, 25, 52, 56, 68, 82,        481
     88, 151, 154-5, 157, 166, 168, 357        Pellagra 533, 549
Obanian 480                                    Penicillium 466
Oca (see also Oxalis tuberosa) 10, 23          Pennisetum (see also Bajra, Millet) 327
Octopus (see also Mollusc) 480                   typhoideum 135, 325
Ocumo (see also Tania, Xanthosoma,             Pepper (see also Capsicum, Piper)
                                                 Bell 443
     Yautia) 10
Oilseed (see also Flax, Linseed, Linum)          Black 327
                                                 Cayenne 443
     324, 326
                                                 Chili 443-50
Okapi 311
                                                 Paprika 443
Olduwan 361
                                                 Red 179
Onager 80, 83-4, 90,95, 320,472-3, 485-8
                                                 Tabasco 444
  Indian 485
                                                 Wild bird 443
  Mesopotamian 485-8
                                               Periwinkle (see also Mollusc) 480
  Persian 485                                  Persimmon 400
Onagraceae 17                                  Phacochoerus aethiopicus (see also Warthog)
Onion (see also Allium) 85, 91                      105
Onobrychis crista-galli 157                    Phaner furcifer (see also Lemur) 526
Cryctolagus cuniculus (see also Rabbit) 211    Phalaris (see also Grass, Canary) 82, 88
Oryx (see also Antelope) 103, 309, 311-2       Phaseolus (see also Bean, Gram)        443,
Oryza sativa (see also Rice) 325, 398               451-62
Ostrea edulis (see also Mollusc, Oyster) 481      acutifolius 452, 454-5, 457-61
Ostrich 312                                       coccineus 452-61
Ovis (see also Sheep) 267-8, 386, 389-90         formosus 453-4, 457, 460
  ammon 364                                       lunatus 179, 452, 454-61
  aries 74, 268, 347, 371                         macrospermus 453
  longipes 308-9, 312                             microspermus 453
  orientalis 91, 267-8                            mungo 326
  platyra 308-9                                  polystachyus 453-4
  shangi 394                                      radiatus 326
  vignei 319                                      vulgaris 179, 452-4, 456-62
Ox (see also Bibos, Bos) 103, 105, 117,        Phoenician 479
     250-1, 262, 281, 293, 351, 486, 517       Phoenix (see also Date) 356, 358
                                                  dactylifers 357
  Kouprey 281
                                               Phyllanthus emblica (see also Amalaka,
Oxalis tuberosa (see also Oca) 10
                                                    Myrobalan) 326
Oyster (see also Mollusc, Ostrea) 480-2
                                               Pig (see also Hylochoerus, Potamochoerus,
                                                     Sus) 7,74, 83-4, 86, 90,101,103,105,
Pachyrhizus 406                                     208, 214, 221, 223, 226-8, 232, 234,
Panicum (see also     Broomcorn,     Millet)         237, 240-2, 247-9, 255, 259, 262,
     135-6                                           266-7, 269-71, 273, 311-12, 318-19,
  callosum 153                                       361, 364-7, 37L 381, 383-4, 387-8,
  miliaceum 135, 153, I6°, 165-6, 398                393-4, 528, 556
Panthera pardus (see also Leopard) 343            Boar 117,248-9,269
Papaveraceae 17                                   Bush-pig 105
Papio hamadryas (see also Baboon) 311             Giant Forest Hog 105
Paranthropus (see also Australopithecus) 527      Hermaphrodite 249
Partridge 77                                      Sow 249
Paspalum scrobiculatum (see also Kodon) 325     Pine (see also Pinus) 36, 38, 400
Patella (see also Limpet, Mollusc) 482         Pineapple (see also Ananas) 179
                                               Pinus (see also Pine) 112, 114
  vulgata 481
568    General Index

Piper nigrum (see also Pepper) 327             Rickets 549
Pistachio 38, 40, 78-9, 84, 86, 90, 363        Roebuck (see also Deer, Hydropotes) 394
Pisum (see also Pea) 157, 160, 356-7           Roman 220, 228, 235, 347-52, 474, 477,
  arvense 324                                       5io, 533, 482-3
  elatius 154, 159, 166                        Rubia tinctorum (see also Madder) 325
  sativum 154, 159, 161, 166                   Rubus idaeus (see also Raspberry) 205
Plantaginaceae 17                              Rumex 112, 115
Plantago (see also Plantain) 88                Rwala 250, 252-3, 256-8, 261
  lanceolata 112                               Rye (see also Lolium) 25,64,68, 82,90,151
Plantain (see also Plantago) 88, 155, 188,
     525                                       Saccharomyces 466
Plough xxv-vi, 56, 88, 125, 234, 247-8,           cerevisiae 466
     308, 375                                     rouxii 466
Polecat (see also Vormela) 337-8, 491          Sagebrush (see also Artemisia) 38
   Marbled 342                                 Saiga 237
Pollination 63-4                                  tatarica 390
Pomegranate (see also Punica) 357              Salix 112
Porphyra 466                                   Samoyed 253
Portulacaceae 17
                                               Saxifragaceae 17
Potamochoerus porous (see also Pig) 105
                                               Saxon 233,240-4,304-5,515
Potamogeton 116
                                               Scallop (see also Mollusc, Pecteri) 179
Potamon (see also Crab) 77
                                               Scirpus (see also Club-rush) 81
Potato (see also Solanum) 10, 23-5, 70,
                                               Scythian 476, 501
     188, 410, 417
                                               Seaweed 463
Pottery xviii, xx, 12,71,124,150,182,193,
                                               Seed Culture 9-10, 12, 21, 23
     203, 226, 260, 3x9, 325-7, 363, 37C
                                               Senecio 112
     393, 415-6, 421, 433, 474-5, 4«5, 53C
                                               Sesamum (Sesame) 67, 324, 327
     555, 559
Prosopis (see also Shauk) 82, 88, 90              indicum 400
Prunus (see also Almond, Sloe) 112             Setaria (see also Millet) 136
  persica 400                                     italica 135, 398
  spinosa 205                                     verticillata 136
Pseudaxis hortularum (see also Deer) 394       Shauk (see also Prosopis) 82, 90
Pteridium 112                                  Sheep (see also Ovis) 74, 80, 82-8, 90-2,
Pumpkin (see also Cucurbit a) 179                    101, 103-4, 106-7, I27, 145-6, 208,
Punica (see also Pomegranate) 356, 358               214,221-3, 226-8, 232-5,237, 239-40,
  granatum 357                                       242-3, 249-53, 262, 266, 295-305, 308,
                                                     312, 318-19, 347, 361, 363-4, 366, 368,
Quercus (see also Acorn)   112-14, 205               371-3, 388, 393-4, 495-521
 brantii 53, 56                                   Hornless 74, 91, 221
 ithaburensis 52, 56                              Wild Audad 372
 persica 38
                                                  Yin 394
Rabbit (see also Oryctolagus) 211,213, 365,    Shifting cultivation (see also Swidden
     489-91                                          cultivation) 4-5, 247-8
Ragi (see also Eleusine, Millet) 325           Sickle 69, 80, 90, 125, 363
Rajania (see also Yam) 406, 422                Silk 326
  cordata 190, 406, 410                        Siluris glanis 389-90
Rake 412                                       Sloe (see also Prunus) 205
Ramapithecus (see also Australopithecus) 527   Snail (see also Helix, Mollusc) 78-9
Rangifer tarandus (see also Deer) 102            Land 77-9, 480, 482-3
Ranunculaceae 17                                 Marine 77
Raspberry (see also Rubus) 205                 Solanum (see also Potato) 422
Rat (see also Nesokia, Rattus, Rhizomys)         tuberosum 10
     209-14, 525                               Somali 333
  Bamboo 394                                   Sonjo 255, 259
  Bandicot 91                                  Sorbus acuparia 112
Rattus norvegicus (see also Rat) 209           Sorghum (see also Amber canes, Dura) 69,
Rhino (Rhinoceros) 78, 104                           252
Rhizomys sinensis (see also Rat) 394             dochna 400
Rhizopus 466                                     propinquum 399
Rice (see also Oryza) 4-5, 13, 25, 68-9,         vulgare 135, 399
     136-7, 325, 327, 398-401, 415, 466,       Spalax podolicus 389-90
    525, 549                                   Sphagnum 12-13
                                                                  General Index         569

Sphenostylis stenocarpa 406                    Triticum—continued
Spirulina 466                                    dicoccum 25, 47, 49, 52, 66, 74, 131-2,
Spondylus gaederopus (see also Mollusc,             151, 155-63, 355-6
     Mussel) 479                                 durum 49, 52, 56, 60, 63-4, 66, 133-4,
Squash (see also Cucurbita) 13, 179, 446            139
Squid (see also Mollusc) 480                     monococcum     47-8, 64, 131-2, 151-2,
Starceco 381-8                                      155-61, 163, 355-6, 358
Stenomeris 406                                   pyramidale 137
Stipa (see also Grass, Feather) 92-2             spelta 131, 163
Stork 312                                        sphaerococcum 323
Sugar cane 6, 179, 327                           thaoudar 49
Sumerian 472, 485                                timopheevi 52, 163
Surana (see also Yam) 327                        turgidum 174
Sus (see also Pig)                               vulgare 132-3, 325
  cristatus 318-9                              Tropaeolum tuberosum (see also Anu) 10
  scrofa 74, 266, 371, 386-7, 389-90,          Tsetse fly 103-4, 248
    394                                        Tuareg 88, 249-62
Sweet Potato (see also Ipomoea) 10, 23, 70,    Tungus 253, 258
    178, 406, 414, 422                         Turtle 83-4, 394
Swidden cultivation (see also Shifting           Water 77, 86, 90
    cultivation) 4-6, 13, 178-9                Typha latifolia 116
Synceros caffer (see also Buffalo) 105
                                               Ulluco (see also Ullucus) 10, 23
Tacca pinnatifida (see also Arrowroot) 10,     Ullucus tuberosus (see also Ulluco) 10
     187                                       Ulmus (see also Elm) 112, 115
Taino 178-81, 184-5, 190, *93                  Ursus (see also Bear) 389-90
Tamarind 332                                     arctos 342
Tamus communis 406, 408                        Urtica 115
Tania (see also Ocumo, Xanthosoma,             Uruk 485
     Yautia) 10, 422
Tapioca (see also Manihot, Manioc) 182-3,      Vegeculture 9-10, 12, 23
     188                                       Vetch (see also Austragalus, Vida) 151,
  Flake 183                                        154-5, 159, 167-8
  Pearl 183                                      Spiny milk 88
Tardenoisian 384, 480                          Vetchling (see also Lathyrus) 82, 90, 155,
Taro (see also Colocasia, Eddo), io, 14,           159, 167
     179, 406                                    Blue 156, 167
Taurotragus (see also Eland)                   Vida (see also Horsebeam, Vetch) 160-1,
  derbianus 105                                    356-7
  oryx 104                                       ervilia 154, 159, 161, 167
Telanthropus (see also Australopithecus) 527    faba 154, 157, 167, 400, 536
Thamnidium 466                                   narbonensis 154, 157, 167
Timber Grave 472                                 noeana 159, 167
Toalian 480                                    Vicuna 254
Tomato 25, 448                                 Vigna 452
Tous-les-mois (see also Canna) 192             Vine (see also Vitis) 357-8
Trapa natans (see also Water chestnut) 400     Vitis (see also Vine) 356, 358
Trichopus 406                                    vinifera 357
Tridacna (see also Mollusc) 479                Volvaria (see also Mushroom) 464, 466
Trigonella (see also Fenugreek, Pea) 82,       Vormela peregusna (see also Polecat) 342
     86, 88, 155                               Vulpes (see also Fox) 341-2
Tripolye 384, 391, 472                           vulpes 341, 389-90
Triticum (see also Einkorn, Emmer, Wheat)      Vulture 312
     61, 64, 159
  aegilopoides 49, 156                         Warthog (see also Phacochoerus) 104-5
  aestivum     60-1, 64, 74, 132, 151-2,       Waterbuck 104
      155-6, 159, 163-4, 174-5, 356-7          Water Chestnut (see also Trapa) 400
  araraticum 51-2, 56, 66                      Weasel 83
  boeoticum 44,48-50, 53, 55~8, 64, 151-2,     Wheat (see also Aegilops, Einkorn, Emmer,
      155-6, 158-9, 161-2, 355, 358                Triticum)    19-20, 25-6, 44, 47-66,
  compactum 133, I52> *58, 164, 323, 325           68-9, 80-1, 84, 87-8, 91, 125, 131-3,
  dicoccoides 44, 49, 5I-3, 55-8, 61, 63-4,        137-40, 147, 150-2, 156, 159-64, 168,
     66, 151-2, 156, 162-3, 355                    173-4, 181, 183, 187, 252, 323,
57° General Index
  Wheat—continued                             Winkle—continued
   325, 355-6, 358, 398-400, 415, 447,         Dog 479
     549
                                              Xanthosoma (see also Cocoyam, Ocumo,
  Bread   60-3, 71, 74, 90, 132-3, 152,
                                                   Tania, Yautia) 406, 422
    163-4, 168, 173-6
                                                sagittifolium 10, 178
  Cappelle-Desprez 173-4
                                                violaceutn 185
  Chinese Spring 173-6
  Club 25, 133, 137, 151-2, 158, 168, 175,    Yakut 253
     323                                      Yam (see also Dioscorea, Rajania, Surana)
  Cone 137                                        10, 14, 23, 70, 179, 190, 327, 405-25
  Dinkel 175                                  Yang Shao 393-4, 398, 400
  Holdfast 173-4                              Yautia (see also Ocumo, Tania, Xanthos¬
  Indian Dwarf 175, 323                           oma) 10, 178
  Macaroni 133, 139                           Yuca (see also Manihot, Manioc) 10
  Spelt 131, 137-9, 164, 175                  Yukaghir 253
  swt, zwt 138-9
  V220 173-4, 176                             Zamia 189-93
  Wild 45, 48, 52, 55, 57-9, 63, 65, 80,      Zea mays (see also Maize) 326
     152, 363                                 Zebra (see also Equus) 102, 104-5, 471
Whelk (see also Mollusc) 480                  Zinjanthropus boisei (see also Australo¬
Wildebeest (see also Connochaetes) 103-5           pithecus) 527
Wine 71                                       Zizyphus (see also Ber, Jujube) 87
Winkle (see also Littorina, Mollusc, Murex,     jujuba 326
    Nucella)                                     vulgaris 324
        INDEX

        Sites (in italics) and Localities


Abusir el-Meleq 310              Austria 502-3                  Bulgaria 150, 154-5, 161-3
Abydos 131, 134                  Azmak, Tell 162-3, 166           166, 384
Achilleion 154, 160, 163, 166,   Azmaska Moghila 154, 161,      Bundso 291
  168                              163, 168                     Burhanpur 331-2
Accra 12                         Azov, Sea of 384, 387          Buzki 382-3, 387, 390
Adamgarh 318, 324                                               Byblos 266
Addington ill                    Balkans 48-9, 152, 162, 226,   Bylany 387
Afghanistan 53, 55, 61, 67         388
Agrab, Tell 486-7, PL ib         Balmaclellan 508               Caerleon 352
Ahmadnagar 332-3                 Baluchistan 318, 323           Cameroons 105, 412, 418-19
Alalakh 473                      Banahilk 374-5                 Can Hasan 154, 159, 165-6,
Aleutian Islands 531             Barbados 178, 182, 186-7         168
Ali Kosh, Tepe 44, 47, 81-6,     Basikov Island 382,385,387,    Carmel, Mt.     (see Mount
  88-9, 150, 154-5, 161-8,         390                            Carmel)
  355_> 372, 374                 Beersheba 266                  Carpathian Basin 221, 225-7
Allahabad 331-2                  Beidha 33,44,47,60, 81,150,    Caspian Sea 36, 41, 43, 61,
All Cannings Cross 352             153-4, 156,163-8,273,355,      63, 163
Amazon 427, 432, 434, 444,         368, 372, 374                Castle Hill 352
  447                            Beisamun 266-73                Catal Huyuk xix, 47, 74, 150,
‘Amuq 150-1, i54> *57= 166,      Bengal 187, 333                  154, 158, 162-8, 270-2,
  168, 374-5                     Berettyoszentmarton 223-5        371, 373-5
Anatolia xix, 47-9, 60, 64,      Bermuda 188-9                  Catcote 348, 352
  66, 68,71,74, 9C 152, 155,     Bernovo Luka 385, 387          Caucasus 26, 473
  158-9, 162-3, 165-7, 270,      Beth-Shean 357                 Cayman Islands 192
  367, 370-1, 374                Beuron 201-2                   Cayonu 370-2, 374
Anau 472, 485                    Bijapur 331-2                  Celebes 416
Ancon 446                        Bir-es-Safadi 268, 271         Ceylon 189, 331, 334, 411,
Andaman Islands 411              Blacklane m-12, 118              417
Andes 10, 24, 26, 73, 427,       Black Sea 36, 41, 43, 162,     Chaco Canyon 32-3
  430, 432, 434, 444, 447          381-2                        Chalus 163
Angola 412                       Bloheia 499                    Chandoli 324, 326
Anhui 398                        Bockingen 203                  Chanhu-daro 324
Antigua 188                      Bodmin Moor in                 Chekiang 398, 400
Arabia 73, 79, 4*7, 471          Bolgrad 382, 385, 387-8        CHien Shan Yang 399-400
Argentina 427-31, 438, 454,      Bolivia 427-30, 432, 434,      Chilca 452
                                   443-4, 446                   Chiloe Island 10
  459
Argissa Maghula 150, I53~4>      Boscombe Down 352              China 12, 17, 33, 68-9, 71,
  160, 162, 165-6, 168, 226,     Bouqras 368, 374                 175-6, 393-402, 411, 415-
  372, 374
                                 Brak, Tell 167                   17, 435, 437, 472-3
Armenia 63, 163                  Brazil 181, 183-4, 189-90,     Ching Ts’un 399
Arpachiyah, Tell 167               411,422,427-8, 430-1, 438,   Choukoutien 527
Arta 33                            444                          Chungking 176
Ashgrove 519                     British Honduras 178           Collessie 518
Aslrgarh 332-3                   Broomfield 515                 Colombia 12, 24, 186, 448
Assam 247-8                      Bug-Dneister 382-8             Combe 514
Australia 124,407,411            Buhen 473                      Congo 412, 421
572    Index of sites and localities

Corcelettes 205                   Galilee, Sea of 49, 52, 55-7    Igreni 382, 387, 389-90
Corrydown 518                     Ganges 12, 26, 320, 326-7       Ilford 280
Costa Rica 422                    Ganj-Dareh, Tepe 362-3, 374     India 10, 26, 68-71, 137,
Crete 160, 301                    Gat, Tel 271-2                     175, 189, 317-29, 331-5,
Crimea 381, 383-6, 389            Gawra, Tepe 485, 487               399,411,415,417,435,471,
Cuba 178, 180-2, 184, 188,        Gaziantep 56                       473, 496
  190, 192                        Gebelein 135                    Indonesia 189, 411, 416-17
Cyrenaica 53, 371-2               Georgia, U.S.S.R. 52, 163       Indus 70, 318-19, 323, 327
                                  Germany 280-1, 285, 292,        loannina 41
                                    492, 508-9, 515               I ping Common 111
Daliyeh 506-7
                                  Ghana 421                       Iran 9, 33, 37-8, 40-5, 47,
Danube 382, 388, 479
                                  Ghassoul 266-71                    49, 5i, 53, 55-7, 60-1, 63,
Dartmoor m-13, 116, 118
                                  Ghediki 154,    160,   162-4,      66, 68, 73-100, 144, 152,
Dead Sea 266, 368, 372, 374,
                                    166-8                             155, 162-4, 175-6, 225,
  503-6
                                  Ghirza 511                         342, 361-3, 367, 374, 482
Deccan 319, 326, 331-4
                                  Glastonbury 352                 Iraq 38, 42-3, 45, 47-9, 51,
Deh Luran 82-4,86-7,90-1,
                                  Glavanesti Vechi 387               56-7, 66, 91, 144, 152,
  155, 372, 374-5
                                  Great Britain xxiii, xxv-vi,        155-6, 162-4, 362, 374-5
Denmark xxvi, 235-6, 279-
                                    70, 113-19. 187. 189, 209,    Israel 40, 49, 53, 56-7, 64,
  81, 284-5, 290, 292, 342,
                                    211, 213, 256, 279-81,           164
  480
                                    284-5, 299-300, 304, 370,     Italy 481
Denny Abbey 304-5
                                    454, 480, 482, 492-3. 500,
Dereivka 391
Deszk-Olajkut 226                   507, 5x2, 515-17              Jamaica 178, 181-3, 186-7,
                                  Greece 41, 48, 150, 153, 155,      189, 191-2, 422
Devil’s Tower, Gibraltar 480
                                    160, 163, 166, 220, 226,      Janjira 331-2, 334
Diyarbakir 56-7
                                    297-8, 302-3, 344, 373-5,     Japaa 416
Dnieper 382-3, 385-6, 389,
  391                               473                           Jarlshof Sumburgh 352
                                  Greenland 528                   Jarmo xix, 150-1,153-4,156,
Dniester (see Bug-Dniester)
                                  Grenadines 178, 189                161-9, 355, 370-2, 375
Dobrogea 361
                                  Groningen 514                   Jericho xix, 44, 150, 154, 157,
Dominica 178, 180-2, 185-6,
                                  Guam 189                           168, 265-6, 337-45, 355-9,
  189, 422
                                  Guarani 430-1, 434, 436-7          368, 370, 372, 374, 506, 541
Dra‘ Abu el-Naga 133-4
                                  Guatemala 94, 179, 446          Jisr-el-Chaghur 42
                                  Guiana 189                      Jordan 32, 44, 47, 49, 53,
Eastwood-F'awkham 352             Guinea 412                         55-6, 59, 73, 81, 156-7,
Ecuador 444                       Gujarat 319, 325, 334              163, 266-7, 273-4, 362,
Egolzwil 202-3                    Guldhoj 498, 500                  367-8
Egton High Moor 112               Guran, Tepe      155, 163-4,
Egypt 17, 71, 131-42, 307-          168                           Kab, El 135
   14, 338, 363-4. 372, 473.      Guyana 422                      Kalibangan 320, 324
  497. 531. 54i                   Gyalaret 226                    Kamennaya Mogila 382, 384,
El . . . (see site names)
Emporio 344                                                         387, 389
                                  Ha filar 47, 150, 153-4, 159,   Kansu 393-4, 400
Epping Forest 237-8
                                    161-6, 168, 355, 374-5        Karanovo 161-3, 166, 168
Es . . . (see site names)
                                  Hagoshrim 266-7, 269-74         Karim Shahir 78
Espiritu Santo 249
                                  Hallstatt 502                   Kashmir 61, 175-6
Ethiopia 10, 67-8, 153, 333
                                  Hallur 324-5                    Katanga 418
Euphrates 26, 49, 53, 55, 80,
                                  Harappa 317, 319-20, 323-5      Kaundinyapur 325
  158, 368
                                  Harrislee 498, 518              Kebarah 339
Ezinge 514
                                  Hastinapur 317, 320, 327        Kenya 104, 412, 418
                                  Haua Ftea 371                   Khafaje, Tel 486
Faaborg 280                       Hawaii 6, 417                   Khiam, El 273, 368
Falkirk 508                       Hibeh, El 138                   Khorramabad Valley Caves 78
Fay dm 132-4, 372                 Highdole Hill 352               Khuzistan 44,     52,   81-2,
Fertile Crescent xix, 48, 52-3,   Hispaniola 178, 180-1, 190-1,     86-91, 94, 155, 372, 374-5
  59                                436                           Kili Ghul Mohammad 318,
Fiji 411, 416                      Dominican Republic 178,          324
Finland 253                           180-1, 184, 190-1           King Fergus Isle 518
Floresti 382, 385, 387-8, 390      Haiti 178, 182                 Kirkstall 352
France 209, 270, 438, 490         Huaca Prieta 433, 446-7         Kish 485, 487
Fuchsberg-Sudensee 291            Huang-niang-t’ai 394            Knossos 160, 164, 168
Fukien 397, 437                   Hungary 222-3, 225-6, 280,      Kolemiislina 385-7
Fussell’s Lodge 290-1              284, 286                       Korn Ombos 363
                                                      Index of sites and localities     573

Konya Plain 158-9               Methil 519                      Paiyampalli 324-6
Korea 416                       Metzer 270                      Pakistan 61,317-29,415,417
Kruglik 382, 385-7, 389         Mexico 9, 25, 67, 71, 94,179,   Palegawra 78
Ks&r ’Akil 77-8, 339             187, 189-90, 427, 432,         Palestine 37, 47, 51-2, 55-6,
Kurdistan 53, 55, 57, 74, 87,    435-7, 446-7, 452-3, 459         61, 66, 71, 80, 153, 155-6,
  89, 156, 163, 167             Mexico City 27                    165, 265-75, 337, 339, 343,
                                Mikhailovka   382,   385-8,       362, 368, 473
Lachish 357                       390-1                         Pandu Rajar Dhibi 324, 327
Lahun, El 136                   Minnis Bay 352                  Pan-p’o 393-4
Lalabad Springs 40              Mirabad, Lake 40                Paraguay 427-8, 430-1, 436,
Langhnaj 317-18, 324            Mitkov Island 382, 387, 390       438
Laos 281                        Mogelmore 518                   Pazirik 501-3, 516
Lebanon 37-8,41,43,45,73,       Mohenjo-daro    317,   320,     Persia 471-2
  78, 273                         323-5                         Peru 25,71,427,430,433-4,
Leens 514                       Moldavia 381, 383, 387-8          437, 443-4, 447-8, 452-3,
Lepenski Vir 556                Momil 12                          531
Levant 73576-7,79,361,363       Morigen 202-3                   Petergate 352
Libya 41, 371                   Morocco 489, 491, 493           Philippines 189, 416, 435
Little Woodbury 352             Mount Carmel 78, 162, 339       Piklihal 317, 324
Littorina Sea 480               Mount Herman 49, 52, 57         Pimenta Bueno 432
Lothal 324-5                    Mundigak 317-18, 323-4          Podgorcie 385-7
Lozves Farm 281, 352            Munhata 266-74, 374             Poland 471
Ludas-Budzak 226                Mureybat, Tell 78, 80, 158,     Polynesia 70, 479
Luka Vrublevetskaya 385, 387     161, 164, 168, 270-1, 368,     Pontefract 352
Lung Shan 393                     374                           Preston 279
Luristan 89, 155                Murrabaat 506                   Proto-Lung Shan 393
                                Murzak Koba 382,      385-7,    Puddle Hill 351
                                  389                           Puerto Rico 178, 180, 182,
Macedonia 161, 373
Madagascar 189,417-18,435,      Mycenae 473                       184, 188, 190-1
                                Mysore 320, 326                 Pyotdykes 519
 526
Maheshzvar 317
Mahisadal 324, 327                                              Qasr Ibrim 512
                                Naga ed-Der 134, 136
Maiden Castle     279, 291,                                     Qumeh 3x0
                                Nagila, Tel 271
 351-2                          Natal 189
Makapansgat 364                                                 Raevehaj 532
                                Navdatoli 324-6
Makou 475                                                       Ramad, Tell 44, 158, 164,
                                Area Nikomedeia    161, 166,
Malatya 56                                                        168
                                   168, 226, 297-8, 373-4
Malaya 183,411,415                                              Rana Ghundai 318-19, 324
                                Nevasa 317, 324-6
Malekula 248                                                    Rancho Peludo 12
                                New Guinea 248, 255, 260,
Mallaha, Ain 78, 267, 269-                                      Rangpur 317, 324-5
                                  411
 70, 362, 367, 374                                              Ratfyn 352
                                New Hebrides 248
Malwa 332-4                                                     Reunion 189
                                New Mexico 32
Manchuria 393, 400                                              Rhodesia 104, 418
                                Newstead 508
Mari 486-7                                                      Robenhausen 202-3, 205
                                New Zealand 455, 516
Maroslele-Pana 226                                              Roszke-Ludvar 226
                                Niah Caves 12
Maskhuta, Tell El- 133                                          Rotherley 351-2
                                Nigeria 105, 420-1
                                                                Roucadour 270
Maski 317, 324                  Nile 26, 32, 135-7, 250, 307,
                                                                Rumania 361, 384
Masterton 519                     310-12, 372
Matarrah, 156,164,168,371,                                      Rylstone 498
                                Noh 327
                                                                Ryukyu Islands 416
  374-5                         North Gill 112, 114-16, 118
Matignons 351                   Northolt 352
Mato Grosso 190, 427, 430,                                      Sabatinovka 385-7
                                Northton, Isle of Harris 481
                                                                Sabz, Tepe 47, 83-6, 89-90,
  432                           Norway 253
Mauritius 189                   Novi Rusesti 382, 385-8, 390       X54-5, 163-8, 374-5
Maya 12                                                         St. Vincent 178, 188-9
                                Nuzi 473
Meare 299, 516, 519                                             Samaria 301
                                                                Sandraki 388
Meir 133
Melanesia 247-8                 Ocampo 452                      San Li Tun 399
                                Ogbourne West 352               Santa Cruz de la Sierra 429,
Memphis 310, 474^
Merimde-Beni Salame 133         Olduvai 527                       432
                                Omari, El 131-2                 Saqqara 132, PI. 11
Mersin 159, 163, 165, 168
Mesopotamia 41, 60, 73, 88,     Osmankayasi 474                 Sawwan, Tell Es- 154,   156,
                                Ozernoye 382, 385-8               162, 164-5, 167-8
 91, 166, 500
574    Index of sites and localities

Schillerplatz 508                Tamaulipas 446                   Vao Island 248
Sebay 518                        Tanzania xviii, 255, 418         Venezuela 12, 24, 411, 429,
Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud 205,   Tas Ayir 381-2, 385-7, 389-        432, 434
  223-4, 279, 288-90               90                             Verroia 297, 302-3
Sepik 259                        Taurus Mountains 43, 45,         Virgin Islands 178, 187-8
Sesklo 154,160,164,166,168         91, 362                        Volga 472
Shanidar Cave 222                Tehuacan 437, 446, 452           Vovnigi 383
Shukbah 339                      Tekkalakota 324, 326             Vulcanesti 382, 385-8
Sialk, Tepe 472, 485             Teleilat-Ghassoul (see also
Siberia 253                        Ghassoul) 266                  Walcheren 518
Skara Brae 351                   Tel(l) (see site names)          Wandlebury 300
Skendleby 352                    Thebes 133, 135                  Warka 373
Skrydrstrup 499, 518             The Rumps 352                    Weissenfels 291
Snail Down 352                   Thessaly 150, 153-4, 160,        Well Street 352
Sobacki Is 382, 385-7, 390         162-7, 372                     Whitehall 233, 241-3
Sonegaon 325                     Tibet 153, 165                   Whitehawk Bay 352
Sonpur 327                       Tigris 26, 156, 162, 362         Windeby 518
Spain 435-6, 438, 480, 489-      Transcaucasia 48, 51-2, 61       Windmill Hill 290-1, 352
  90, 512                        Transjordan 49, 53, 55           Woodcuts 352
Star Carr 111,118,279,291,       Transvaal 258, 364               Woodhenge 352
  35i, 370                       Trinidad 422                     Woodyates 352
Steinfeld 514                    Tripoli 510
Sterkfontein 527                 Turkestan 250, 472               Xanten 508-9
Stonehenge 351                   Turkey 37-8, 41-5, 48-9,
Strelca Skelya 382, 385-8,         51-3, 55-7, 59, 61, 66, 152,   Yabrud 77
  390                              162-5, 361                     Yafteh 78
Stump Cross 112                  Turkmenia 53, 381                Yang Shao 393
Suberde 375                                                       Yugoslavia 226
Sudan 105, 249
                                 Uganda 104, 412
Sulayevo 382, 385-7, 389                                          Zagros Mountains xix,       38,
                                 Ugarit 473-4
Sumpf-Zug 202-3                                                     4i, 43-5, 47, 57, 73, 77"9,
                                 Ukraine 104,381,384,387-8,
Surski Island 382,385-7,389,                                        81, 89, 91, 144, 155-6, 163,
                                   472
  390                                                               361-3
                                 United States 189, 234, 406,
Susa 472,475,485-7                                                Zambia 104
Sutton Hoo 515                     433, 437-8
                                                                  Zamil Koba 381-2, 385-7,
                                 Unterteutschenthal 498
Svaerdborg 290                                                      389
                                 Ur 90, 485-7, PI. Ha
Sweden 284-5                                                      Zawi Chemi Shanidar     78,
                                 Uruguay 428
Switzerland 201-6, 223, 279,                                        143-8, 221-2, 362-3, 371,
                                 Usatovo 385-8
  290                                                               374
                                 U.S.S.R. 52, 102, 163, 281,
Syria 37-8, 41-3, 45, 48-9,                                       Zeribar, Lake 38,40,44,144,
  5i-3, 55-6, 61, 66-8, 73,        38i-95, 5i5
                                                                    363
                                 Utnur 317-21, 324, 326
  80, 155, 157-8, 164, 250,                                       Zurich- U toquai-F arberstrasse
  270-1, 273, 368, 374, 473                                         202-4
Szechwan 397, 400                Vallon des Vaux 202-3            Zuttiyeh 339
       INDEX

      Authors


Abad, J. R. 196-7, 199         Bachiller y Morales, A. 194    Birkett-Smith, K. 262
Abbad y Lasierra, I. 199       Bader, R. S. 217               Bishop, C. W. 399, 401
Aberg, E. 132, 140, 142        Bailey, L. H. 196-7            Bissing, K. von 314
Aberg, F. A. xxvi              Baker, H. G. 216               Bittel, K. 478
Abregu, V. C. 440              Baker, T. R. 128, 249, 262     Blanco, M. 440
Abu’l-Fazl 334                 Baker, P. T. 542               Bligh, J. 108
Acosta, J. de 447, 449         Balkan, K. 478                 Blumberg, B. S. 216
Adametz, L. 293                Balout, L. 484                 Bobek, H. 37-8, 41, 45-6
Adams, L. 128                  Banks, C. 283                  Bodenheimer, F. S. 344-5
Adams, R. M. 88-90, 92, 96,    Barham, H. 186-7, i95j i98     Boessneck, J. 224, 226, 229,
  98-9                         Barker, H. 46, 197, 199          289-90, 293-4, 379
Adamson, J. 378                Barrau, J. 423-4               Bohlken, H. 274, 277, 293
Aldred, C. 474                 Barrett, O. W. 196             Bois, D. 196, 198, 435, 439-
Alexander, J. 423-5            Bartlett, H. H. 185, 198         40
Alexandersen, V. 538, 543      Bate, D. M. A. 97, 267, 274,   Bokonyi, S. 99, 215, 224,
Allard, R. W. 462                339; 344                       229, 284, 286, 294, 475,
Allchin, B. 128                Batten, C. A. 215                477-8
Allchin, F. R. 321-2, 424      Baumhoff j M. A. 377           Boldingh, I. 197
Allee, W. C. 97                Beasley, A. B. 216             Bolhuis, G. G. 437, 440
Alur, K. R. 319-22             Beattie, W. 438, 441           Boloyan, D. S. 377
Ames, O. 435, 440              Beckwith, M. W. 195, 198       Bond,G. 118
Amiet, P. 477                  Beer, G. R. De 215             Bordaz, J. 379
Amoroso, E. C. 256, 263        Bell, G. D. H. 169, 172        Bose, S. 96
An Chih-min 401                Bendig, A. W. 210, 215         Botteina, S. 158, 171
Anati, E. 477                  Bennett, W. C. 194             Bottema, S. 42, 46
Anderson, E. 430, 435, 439-    Bentham, G. 462                Bowden, P. J. 506, 520
  40                           Benzon, P. E. 197-8            Bowen, H. C. xxvi
Anderson, J. 235, 244          Berger, R. 544                 Boyrie Moya, E. de 199
Anderson, P. W. 468            Bergh, B. O. 449               Bradford, E. W. 543
Andersson, J. G. 395, 401      Bernegg, A. S. von 196-8       Braidwood, L. xxi
                               Berry, R.J. 213,215-16,244,    Braidwood, R. J. xx, xxi, 66,
Angel, J. L. 54°, 542, 544
Anghiera, P. M. d’ 185, 190,     294                            68, 71-2, 97, 169, 305, 376,
  196, 199                     Bertsch, F. and K. 166, 170,     378, 544
                                 172, 201, 203, 205-6         Braun, H. W. 210, 215
Ansanus, T. 199
                               Beug, H. J. 46; 147            Brautlecht, C. A. 195, 197
Ansari, Z. D. 329
                               Bibby, B. G. 552               Britton, N. L. 196-7, 199
Ansell, A. D. 483
                               Bibikova, V. I. 391-2          Broadhurst, P. L. 210, 215
Antonius, O. 476, 478, 485,
                               Biddle, M. 128                 Broholm, H. C. 499
  488                                                         Brooks, C. E. P. 352
Arcikhowski, A. W. 221-2,      Bigalke, R. C. 108
                               Billings, W. D. 14             Brothwell, D. R. 216, 527,
  229
                               Bilton, L. 279, 293              529; 540, 543-4; 549; 552
Aristophanes 489, 493
                               Binford, L. R. and S. R.       Brown, W. H. 197-8
Aristotle 489-90, 493
                                 75-8, 81, 96-7               Browne, P. 195, 198
Armelagos, G. 541, 544
                               Bird, J. 449                   Braes, A. 545
Ashbee, P. 291
                               Birdsell, J. B. 76, 96         Bryan, K. 32, 34
Ashton, H. 263
                               Birdwood, C. 331, 333~4        Buechner, H. K. 109
Audy, J. R. 544
576     Index of authors

Bunatti, E. xxi                  Colmeiro, M. 196                Dimbleby, G. W. 115, 118
Bunting, A. H. 17, 28, 439-      Cominges, J. de 440               128, 148
  40                             Com§a, E. 391                   Dimitrieva, E. L. 391
Burkart, A. 428, 439             Contenson, H. de 46, 377        Dobyns, H. F. 544
Burkill, I. H. 71-2, 195, 198,   Cook, L. M. 216                 Dobzhansky, T. 217
  399, 407, 414, 423-5           Cook, O. F. 195, 197            Dogett, H. 399, 402
Burnell, A. C. 197               Cook, S. F. 540, 544            Dole, G. E. 194
Burton-Page, J. 335              Coon, C. S. 67, 72, 221, 229,   Donaldson, H. H. 215
Butzer, K. W. 76, 96, 377          54i, 544                      Dossin, R. 477
Bylin-Althin, M. 395             Corbet, G. B. 216               Dubard, M. 429, 433-5,
                                 Cordemoy, C. J. de 440            438-9, 441
                                 Corkill, N. L. 423              Ducos, P. 274, 368, 377-9
Cain, A. J. 482, 484             Cornwall, I. W. 484             Duddington, C. L. 468
Callen, E. O. 542-3              Corominas, J. 423               Duell, P. 314
Cameron, T. W. M. 543            Costantin, J. 439               Dunn, L. C. 213, 216
Caminos, R. A. 142               Cottrell, F. 377
Candolle, A. de 17, 27-9,        Coucoli, H. 176
  165, 196, 198, 205-6, 439,     Coursey, D. G. 14, 419,
                                                                 Ebeling, E. 477
  452, 460, 462                    423-5                         Ehrich, R. W. 379
Carbonell, V. M. 216             Cousens, H. 334
                                                                 Elgee, F. and H. W. 118
Carr, H. G. 543                  Cowgill, U. M. 15
                                                                 Emery, W. B. 141-2, 477
Carruthers, N. 352               Coy, J. P. 353
                                                                 Engelbrecht, T. 19, 25, 28-9,
Carter, H. 141                   Cranstone, B. A. L. 244, 529
Casal, J.-M. 321, 328                                              68, 72
                                 Crawford, M. A. 108
Case, H. J. 478                                                  Eshbaugh, W. H. 449
                                 Crawford, O. G. S. 493
Casparie, W. A. 158, 171                                         Estienne, C. 493
                                 Croix, Petis de la 493
Caton-Thompson, G. 132,                                          Etchells, J. L. 468
                                 Crossland, R. A. 477
  134, 140-1                                                     Evans, I. M. 215-16
                                 Crothers, J. H. 216
Caylus, de 136, 141                                              Evans, J. D. 171
                                 Crowcroft, P. 216
Cerny, J. 137, 142                                               Evans, J. G. xxvi, 128
                                 Crum, W. E. 141
Cernys, E. K. 391                                                Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 257,
                                 Cruxent, J. M. 12, 15
Cervino, P. A. 440                                                 262
                                 Cundall, F. 195
Chadha, Y. R. 194                                                Everington, E. 195
                                 Cunliffe, R. S. 195
Chang, K. C. 399, 401                                            Ewing, J. F. 77, 97
                                 Currington Goodrich, L. 440
Chang, S. T. 469
Chang Yun P’eng 395
Chaplin, R. E. 215, 244-5,       Danilenko, V. M. 385, 387,      Fagan,B. 424-5
  353                              391                           Fagg, B. A. B. 129
Chapman, D. 244                  Dardeau, W. S. 197, 199         Falcon, N. L. 96
Chapman, V. 176                  Daressy, G. 136, 141            Falkenstein, A. 477
Ch’en Meng chia 401-2            Darling, F. Fraser 72, 245      Farris, E. J. 210, 215
Cheng Nai-wu 395                 Darlington, C. D. 28-9, 72,     Farron, M. 423
Cheng, T. K. 401                  462                            Feinbrunn, N. 357, 359
Chevalier, A. 420, 425, 431,     Dart, R. A. 377, 527            Fentress, J. C. 370, 378
  435? 439-40                    Darwin, C. 68, 72               Fewkes, J. W. 194
Childe, V. G. xviii-xxi, 159,    Davenport, W. H. 199            Field, N. R. 353
  483, 537, 543, 556, 558        David, A. I. 391                Fisher, R. A. 217
Chowdhury, K. A. 329             Davidson, S. 544                Flannery, K. V. xviii, xxi,
Christy, H. xx                   Davies, O. 128, 421, 425          14, 34, 46, 66, 82, 96-9,
Chu Chiang 401                   Dawkins, W. Boyd 353              155, 170, 342, 345, 371,
Clark, J. D. 377, 424-5          Day, G. M. 118-19                 379, 496, 504, 520, 552
Clark, J. G. D. 118, 483-4,      De, D. N. 423                   Forde, C. D. 125, 127-8,
  477                            Debono, F. 131, 140               262, 423
Clausen, J. 467, 469             Deevy, E. S. 544                Foster, J. B. 211,215
Clavigero, F. S. 437, 440        Defremery, C. 335               Fowler, P. J. xxvi
Clutton-Brock, J. 321, 345,      Degerbol, M.       281, 283,    Fox,A. 118
  368, 370, 372, 376, 378          293“4j 342, 345, 378          Frankfort, H. 488
Cobo, B. 194-6, 433, 439,        Delany, M. I. 216               Fraser, A. S. 506, 520
  447-9                          Deo, S. B. 321, 329             Fraser, F. C. 283, 293, 352-3
Cogswell, C. 198                 Deshler, W. 108                 Freeman, J. D. 69, 72
Collinder, B. 262-3              Desportes, J. B. R. P. 195      Friederici, G. 184, 196
Collins, G. N. 195, 197          De Vore, I. 529                 Friend, M. T. 108
Coll y Toste, C. 194             Dewall, M. von 477              Furlong, G. 440
                                                                      Index of authors        577


Gadd, C. J. 477                  Hammen, T. van der 46             Hole, F. xviii, xxi, 14, 46, 66,
Galton, Sir F. 69, 72            Hansen, C. L. 377                   74, 82, 92, 96-9, 155, 170,
Garci£, J. G. 199                Harding, J. P. 280                  377,379
Garcilaso de la Vega,       I.   Harding, T. G. 99                 Hollis, A. C. 252
  447-50                         Hare, B. 72                       Homer 541
Gardiner, A. H. 137-9, 142       Harkness, C. 440                  Hooker, J. D. 331, 334
Gardner, E. W. 140-1             Harlan, J. R. 17-18, 25,          Hopf, M. 46, 149-50, 157,
Gam, S. M. 543                     28-9, 35, 45-65 50-1, 545         161, 166, 170-2, 378
Garrod, D. A. E. 97, 375,          59, 66, 72, 80, 97, 162, 169,   Hopkins, J. 222, 229
 484                               172, 3755 3 77                  Hosgood, S. M. W. 216
Geertz, C. 14                    Harrington, M. R. 194             Hou, H. C. 543
Gesner, C. 490-3                 Harris, D. R. 14, 23-4, 29,       Howard, M. M. 348, 352
Ghirshman, R. 475, 478, 488        72, 198                         Howard, R. A. 198
Ghosh, S. S. 329                 Harris, H. 216                    Howard, Lord W. 492-3
Gibbens, R. P. 119               Harrison, D. L. 344               Howard, W. E. 214, 217
Gibbons, R. W. 440               Harrison, H. S. xx                Howe, B. 66, 97, 305
Gifford, J. 199                  Harrison, J. L. 544               Howell, F. C. 78, 96-7
Gilii, F. L. 435, 438, 440-1     Harrison, T. 14                   Hoygaard, A. 528-9
Gillen, F. 128                   Harthoorn, A. M. 108              Hsieh Ch’un chu 401
Gillett, J. D. 217               Hartman, L. F. 71-2, 140,         Hsieh Tuan-chu 395
Gilmore, R. M. 262                                                 Hu Yiieh ch’ien 401
                                   142
Ginsberg, B. E. 369, 378                                           Hubby, J. L. 216
                                 Hawkes, J. G. 14, 552
Glabe, E. F. 468                                                   Huber, B. 206
                                 Hawkins, W. W. 468
Godwin, H. 111,118                                                 Hughes, G. 195, 198
                                 Heady, H. F. 119
Goggin, J. M. 199                                                  Hull, F. H. 430, 439
Goldman, P. F. 468               Heekeren, J. van 424
                                                                   Hunt, R. 440
GolOmshtok, E. A. 478            Heer, O. 201, 203, 205-6          Hutchinson, Sir J. B. 29, 72,
Gomara, F. L. de 186, 198        Heere, W. 478
                                                                     327, 451, 462
Goodall, J. 526, 529             Heim, J. 144, 147
                                                                   Huxley, J. 539, 544
Goodwin, R. H. 118               Heiser, C. B. 215, 437, 440,
Goose, D. H. 216                   449
Gordon, B. Le Roy 196            Heitkamp, D. 14
                                                                   Irvine, F. R. 424
Gourou, P. 424                   Heizer, R. F. 542
                                                                   Isaac, E. 373, 379
Gray, R. A. H. 347, 352          Helbaek, H. 17, 26, 28-9,
                                                                   Isidore 490, 493
Gray, R. F. 262-3                  46-75 555 60, 66, 68, 72,       Iversen, j. 115,118
Gregory, W. C. 427, 429,           82, 88, 90, 98-9, 132-4,
  438-9                            139-42, 149-50, 153, 155-6,
Griaznov, M. P. 478                158-9, 162, 164, 166-7,
                                                                   Jackson, J. R. 199
Grieg, O. 116,119                  169-72, 355, 357-9, 377         Jackson, J. W. 279, 283, 293,
Griffith, F. LI. 142             Henry, V. C. R. 425
                                                                      352-3, 483
Grigson, C. 280, 291, 293,       Hermann, F. J. 439
                                                                   Jaffe, A. J. 540, 544
  353                            Hernandez, F. 437, 440
                                                                   Jensen,A. 468
Grosourdy, R. de 197, 199        Herodotus 308, 476, 478           J6quier, P. 224, 229, 289-
Grubb, P. 109, 245               Herre, W. 128                        90, 293-4
Grunnet, N. T. 263               Herrera Fritot, R. 194            Jerath, M. 128
Guerin, B. C. De 468             Hesse, R. 97                      Jewell, P. A. 108-9, 245,
Guha, B. S. 317, 321-2           Hesseltine, C. W. 464, 466,          256, 263, 293, 348, 351-3
Guibourt, (G.) 198
                                   469                             John, C. M. 439
Guilday, J. 244                  Hey, R. W. 41, 46                 Johnson, F. R. 440
Gulati, A. N. 329                Heyne, K. 197-8                   Johnson, R. M. 194
Gupta, P. C. 328-9
                                 Hiesey, W. M. 469                 Jones, D. A. 215
                                 Higgins, B. B. 440-1              Jones, I. D. 468
                                 Higgs, E. S. 34, 226, 229,        Jones, W. O. 195
Hafez, E. S. E. 109
                                   283, 293, 297, 353, 371-2,      Jope, M. 353
Haimovici, S. 391
                                   379, 521
                                                                   Joshi, R. V. 321
Hald, M. 499                                                       Jumelle, H. 424
Haldane, J. B. S. 216            Hilzheimer, M. 99, 279, 293,
                                   475, 478, 486, 488              Just Pequart, M. and St. 484
Hale, E. B. 109
Hall, K. R. 529                  Hippocrates 533
Hamada, A. 142                   Hitscher, K. 279, 293
Hamada Kosaku 395                Hodgen, M. T. 557, 560            Kammenhuber, A. 477
Hamada, M. K. O. 506, 520        Hodgson, G. W. I. 352             Kaplan, L. 449, 452-3, 456,
Hamilton, W. 198                 Hoehne, F. C. 439                  458, 461-2
 578    Index of authors

Kawamura, S. 529                Lee, B. T. O. 216               Mazess, R. B. 532, 542
Keck, D. D. 469                 Lee, R. B. 96                   Mazzani, N. 433, 439
Keef, P. A. M. 118              Lee, T’ao 543                   McAndrews, J. H. 46, 376
Keeler, C. E. 210, 215          Lees, G. M. 96, 99              McArthur, M. 528-9
Kees, H. 311,3x3-14             Lees, S. H. 96, 99              McCarthy, F. D. 96
Keiller, A. 493                 Leithner, O.     F.   279-80,   McDowell, R. E. 108
Keimer, L. 141, 307-8,            293-4                         McMaster, D. 424
  313-14                       Leon, J. 425                     Mecquenem, R. de 488
Kelso, A. J. 541, 544          Leopold, A. S. 217               Meek, A. 347, 352
Kenyon, K. M.       46, 157,   Lerner, I. M. 216                Megard, R. O. 376
  266, 337, 344, 357-9         Levy, J. 128                     Mehra, K. L. 329
Kerney, M. P. 484              Lewis, C. B. 199                 Meighan, C. W. 484
Kettlewell, H. B. D. 217       Lewis, W. M. 468                 Meikle, J. O. 440
Kettlitz, W. K. 108            Lewontin, R. C. 216, 293         Meldgaard, J. 170
Kihara, H. 63, 66, 131         Lhote, H. 476, 478               Mellaart, J. 66, 68, 72, 378-9
Kiley-Worthington, M. 109      Li Chung-i 402                   Mellquist, C. 538, 543
King, H. D. 209-10, 215        Liere, W. van 46                 Merrill, E. D. 435, 440
King, J. E. 283, 293, 352      Lindley, J. 199                  Merz, W. 206
Kirkbride, D. 46, 66, 98       Lippert, L. F. 449               Metraux, A. 194, 423, 440
Kirkby, A. V. T. and M. J.     Little, M. A. 542                Metreweli, C. 543
  14, 98                       Livingstone, F. B. 541, 544      Miege, J. 419, 425
Klatt, B. 215                  Livingstone, H. G. 108           Milburn, W. 198
Kleiman, D. G. 378             Livy 478                         Milkman, R. D. 216
Knorre, Y. 108                 Lloyd,H. G. 215                  Miller, J. P. 32, 34
Kobayashi, K. 540, 544         Long, E. 195, 198                Miller, P. 197-8
Kohl, G. 172                   Loon, M. van 97-8, 158, 377      Mills, J. P. 262
Krainov, D. A. 391             Loret, V. 134, 141               Mintz, S. W. 195, 199
Krapovickas, A. 428, 438-9     Louis, H. 37-8, 45               Mittre, V. 325, 327-9
Kravchenko, D. 108             Loureiro, J. 440                 Miyares Gonzalez, F. 199
Krestenson, M. K. 199          Loven, S. 184, 196               Mizuno Seiichi 395
Kubasiewicz, M. 224            Lowe, V. P. W. 245               Moir, R. J. 377
Kuckuck, H. 176                Lowie, R. H. 196                 Molen, H. van der 46
Kuo Te-yung 395                Lii Tsun-e 395                   Moller, G. 314
Kuptsov, A. 67, 69, 72         Lydekker, R. 294                 Molleson, T. I. 543
Kurt6n, B.    215, 244, 277,   Lydgate, J. 4915 493             Monardes, N. 433, 439
  293-4j339-45                 Lyman, C. P. 108                 Mongait, L. 129
                                                                Montet, P. 313
                                                                Morris, D. 107-9
La Baume, W. 293               Mackay, E. J. H. 328, 488        Morse, D. 544
Lacaille, A. D. 484            Mackey, J. 46, 176               Mortensen, P. 170
Lack,D. 244                    Mackie, W. W. 452, 462           Mortillet, G. xx
Laeyendecker-Roosenburg,       MacNeish, R. S. 446, 449         Moseley, M. E. 449
  D. M. 14                     Madic, V. R. 469                 Mourant, A. E. 262
Lagercrantz, S. 256, 263       Maguire, B. 377                  Movius, N. J. 484
Lai, B. B. 321, 329            Malaret, A. 194, 196-7           Murdock, G. P. 425
Lambrecht, F. L. 544           Maldonado, A. 435, 440           Musil, A. 262
Lamprey, H. E. 104, 108        Malinowski, B. xx
Lanning, E. P. 449             Malsburg, K. von 293
Larsen, B. A. 468              Markeyevic, V. I. 391            Nahlik, A. 515,521
Lartet, H. xx                  Marshall, J. 328                 Nairne, A. K. 331, 334
La Sagra, R. de 197-8          Martin, F. W. 423                Necrasov, C. 391
Las Casas, B. de 180, 190,     Martius, C. F. P. von 185,       Neely, J. A. 66, 82, 99, 379
  194-6, 199                     197                            Nehring, A. 293
Latham, M. 108                 Martyn, T. 197-8                 Neitz, W. O. 108
La Torre y Huerta, C. de 194   Maruyama, M. 100                 Netolitzky, F. 141
Lauer, J.-Ph. 132, 140, 142    Masson, V. M. 98                 Neuweiler, E. 203, 205-6
Lawrence, B. 345, 378-9        Mather, K. 216                   Nicholls, H. A. 195, 198
Lawrence, D. B. 14, 115, 118   Mathews, C. L. 353               Nicolaisen, J. 99, 255, 258-9,
Laws, R. M. 107, 109           Mathiassen, T. 283                 262-3
Layard, J. 248-9, 262, 475-6   May, J. M. 85, 93-4, 98, 100     Niering, W. A. 118
Leakey, L. S. B. 527, 529      Mayr, E. 215-16, 520             Nims, C. F. 139-40, 142
Leclant, A. 478                Maza y Jimenez, M. G. de la      Nimendaju, C. 196
Ledger, H. P. 108               196-7, 199                      Nobis, G. 291-4
                                                                  Index of authors      579

Noble, D. S. 477               Pike, A. W. 128, 544            Rohrs, M. 491, 493
Nolan, P. 543                  Piper, C. V. 452, 462           Roig y Mesa, J. T. 197, 199
Nordenskiold, E. 194           Piso, W. 195-6                  Roldan, E. F. 469
                               Pitt-Rivers, A. 353             Rosenfeld, A. xxi
                               Platt, B. S. 82, 84, 97-8       Rosenqvist, A. M. 499-500
Obermaier, H. 484              Platt, I. P. 353                  520
O’Callaghan, R. T. 477         Pliny 484, 490, 493, 533-4,     Rossignol, M. 46, 96-7
Odum, E. P. and H. T. 14,         54i, 556                     Roth, W. E. 194, 198
  97                           Pohlhausen, H. 229              Roumain, J. 184, 196
Ohwi, J. 462                   Polman, A. 216                  Rouse, I. 12, 15, 184, 196,
Ojehomon, O. O. 456, 462       Polunin, I. 540, 544              425
Okiy, G. E. O. 423             Porada, E. 478                  Rowe, F. P. 216
Olivier, M. 440                Poulain, J. B. 321              Rumphius, G. E. 440
Olson, R. 128                  Poulain-Josien, T. 352          Rutimeyer, L. 279, 293
Oppenheim, A. L. 71-2,140,     Powers, R. 543                  Ryder, M. L. 91, 99, 353,
  142, 478
Ortiz, S. 423
                               Poznanski, M. 424
                               Prakash, O. 329
                                                                    -. .
                                                                 503 5 509 519-21
Otero, J. I. 197               Prasad, B. 317,319,321-2
Otten, C. M. 544               Prenleloup, L.-A. 199           Saad,Z. Y. 142
Otten, H. 478                  Puglisi, S. M. 484              Safford, W. E. 198
Otto, E. 314                   Pumpelly, R. 488                Saglanskii, A. D. 108
Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de                                      Salisbury, Sir E. 128, 215
  185, 194-6, 199, 436, 440,                                   Salonen, A. 477-8
  447-9                                                        Sampson, P. 375
                               Quibell, J. E. 141
Ovington, J. D. 14                                             Samuels, R. 543
                               Quispel, A. 118
Owen, C. E. 493                                                Sandberg, T. 538, 543
                               Quitta, H. 172
                                                               Sanguinetti, B. R. 335
                                                               Sankalia, H. D. 321, 328-9
Pabot, H. 37-8,42,45,91,99                                     Santa Cruz, A. de 196
Paffen, K. H. 11               Radcliffe-Browne, A. R. 128     Sapper, K. 184, 196
Pairault, A. 195               Radulesco, C. 375               Sauer, C. O. 19,23,28-9,67,
Palerm, A. 94, 100             Raglan, Lord 69, 72               72, 178, 184, 193-4, 196,
Pao, E. M. 543                 Raikes, R. L. xx-xxi, 33-4        423-4
Parker, I. S. C. 107, 109      Rankine, W. F. 116, 119         Saunders, W. 198
Parmalee, P. 244               Ranking, J. 493                 Save-Sodebergh, T. 314
Parrot, A. 488                 Rao, N. 322, 328-9              Schaeffer, C. F. A. 478, 486,
Parsons, P. A. 216             Rao, P. S. 66                     488
Passek, T. S. 391-2            Rao, S. R. 321, 328             Schaller, G. B. 109, 526, 52Q
Passmore, R. 544               Rappaport, R. A. 99             Schapera, I. 263
Payne, W. J. A. 72, 108        Raswan, C. R. 485, 488          ScharfF, A. 314
Percival, J. 131-3,138,140-2   Rathjen, A. 458, 462            Schenkel, R. 378
Pereira, J. 199                Rausing, G. 559-60              Schery, R. W. 195
Perkins, D. 99,221,229,273,    Raymond, W. D. 194, 198         Schiemann, E. 131, 133
  37i> 376, 378-9              Reed, C. A. 80, 97, 295, 345,   Schloeth, R. 109
Perrier de la Bathie, H. 424     376-9, 482, 484               Schmidt, K. P. 97
Perrot, J. 80, 97, 266, 368,   Reeder, J. R. 99                Schmidt-Nielsen, K. 92, 99
  375, 377
                               Rendle, A. B. 462               Schoeniker, R. E. 118
Peter Martyr (see Anghiera,    Renfrew, J. M. 170-2            Schomburgk, R. H. 197-8
  P. M. d’)                    Requate, H. von 283, 285-6,     Schulman, A. R. 478
Peterson, R. F. 169, 172         294                           Schumann, K. 196, 198
Petrie, Sir W. M. Flinders     Reynolds, F. and V. 529         Schuster, J. 199
   131, r34, 136, 140          Richter, C. P. 209-10, 215      Schwanitz, F. 28, 462
Petter, J. J. 526, 529         Rigoni, V. A. 428, 438-9        Schweinfurth, G. 133, 135,
Pfeiffer, R. 478               Rihl, M. E. 543                   141, 307
Phillips, J. 108               Riley, R. 66, 163, 172, 176     Scott, J. P. 369-70, 378
Phillip son, J. 14             Robinson, J. T. 527, 529        Searle, A. G. 213, 216
Pichardo, E. 194-7, l99        Robinson, R. 215                Sennitt, B. F. C. 215-16
Pickersgill, B. 449            Rocha, A. C. Da 440             Sethe, K. 142
Pidophiko, I. G. 387, 391-2    Rodden, J. M. and R. J. 161,    Sewell, R. B. S. 317, 320-22
Pietersz, J. L. 195              171                           Sharma, A. K. 423
Pietrarelli, J. 427,438        Roe, A. 293                     Sharma, T. 424
Piggott, S. 293, 477, 521,     Rogers, D. J. 194               Shatin, R. 541, 544
  560                          Rohmann, C. G. 543              Shaw, T. 425
580     Index of authors

Shawcross, F. W. 279, 283.      Stewart, O. C. 119             Vaughan, V. 544
   293, 353, 52i                Stoljar, A. D. 384, 391        Vavilov, N. I. 17, 19-20,
Sheng-Han, S. 543               Stone, C. P. 2x0, 215            25-6, 28-9, 67-8, 72, 455,
Sheshadri, C. R. 439            Stonor, C. R. 262                460
Short, B. F. 521                Strabo 489, 493, 533           Venkatanarayana, G. 439
Shou Tien 395                   Stuckenrath, R. 46             Verdcourt, L. D. 108
Sidney, J. 108-9                Sturtevant, W. C. 193-4        Vesey-Fitzgerald, D. F. 108
Sieburth, J. McN. 468           Suarez, C. I94"5, *97, 199     Vignard, E. 377
Sieveking, G. 424               Subbarao, B. 321               Villaret-von Rochow, M. 206
Silow, R. A. 462                Subba Rao, G. N. 466, 469      Virgil 222
Silver, I. 245                  Szalay, B. 229                 Virolleaud, Ch. 477
Simmonds, N. W. 424, 451,                                      Vita-Finzi, C. 34
  462                                                          Vogel, J. C. 46
Simmons, I. G. 118-19           Tabares de Ulloa, F. 438
Simons, E. L. 527, 529             441
Simpson, G. G. 277, 293         Tacitus 478
Sinskaja, E. N. 19-20, 28       Tackholm, G. and V. 131,       Wainwright, G. J. 118
Skead, D. M. 109                                               Walker, D. 114,118
                                   134-6, 139-42
Skinner, J. D. 108                                             Walker, E. P. 82, 98
                                Talbot, L. M. 108
Skvortzow, B. V. 435, 440                                      Walter, H. 42, 377
                                Talbot, M. H. 108
Sloane, H. 186, 198             Talbot Rice, T. 478            Wang, H. L. 466, 469
Smalley, I. J. 34               Tanner, D. 244                 Warren, S. H. 539, 543
Smartt, J. 439-40                                              Wasylikowa, K. 46
                                Taubert, P. 452, 462
Smith, B. W. 439                                               Waterbolk, H. T. 46
                                Taylor, C. R. 108
Smith, E. L. 66                                                Watson, D. M. S. 353
                                Taylor, D. 194-5
Smith, I. F. 353, 537, 543      Tebboth, T. 440                Watson, P. J. 85, 87, 98-9,
Smith, J. 199                   Tejera, E. 194-5                 543
Smith, M. 466, 469              Telegin, D. J. 391             Watson, W. 424
Smith, P. E. L. 376             Tertre, J. B. du 185-6, 195,   Watt, G. 197, 319, 322, 328,
Smith, P. G. 449                  198, 438                       334
Solecki, R. L. 78, 97, 145,     Thapar, B. K. 321-2            Weddell, H. A. 439
  147, 375                      Thomson, D. F. 127-8           Weidner, E. A. 478
Solecki, R. S. 78, 96-7, 144,   Thrane, H. 170                 Wendorf, F. 32, 34
  147                           Timmers, M. W. 42              Westlake, D. F. 14
Solheim, W. G. 424              Ting Ying 401                  Wet, J. M. J. de 17-18, 28
Soudsky, B. 391                 Tinker, H. 216                 Wheeler, R. E. M. 293, 424
Sparks, B. 128                  Tonnelier, A. C. 438, 441      White, R. 245
Speck, J. 203, 206              Toro, R. A. 197                White, T. 82-3, 98, 244
Speiser, E. A. 478, 488         Torto, J. O. 424-5             Whiting, M. G. 199
Spencer, B. 128                 Towle, M. A. 433, 439          Wijmstra, T. A. 46
Spencer, J. E. 15               Townsend, M. 484               Wild, H. 140, 142
Spurway, H. 215, 217            Treus, V. 108                  Wilkinson, G. 141
Squier, E. G. 439               Tringham, R. 128, 556, 559     Williams, A. W. 14, 98
Squires, J. 198                 Troels-Smith, J. 283           Wilson, P. 196-7, 199
Stampfli, H. R. 224, 229,       Troll, C. 11                   Winlock, H. E. 141
  279, 288-90, 293-4, 37i,      Tschermak, E. 131              Wissman, H. von 67, 72
  375,378-9                     Tubbs, D. Y. 544               Wittmack, L. 439
Standal, B. R. 469              T’ung Chu’ch’en 395            Wolf, E. 94, 100
Standley, P. C. 445, 449        Tweedle, M. 424                Wood, P. D. xxvi
Stanton, W. R. 148                                             Woodham-Smith, C. 72
Stayt, H. A. 263                                               Wood Robinson, C. 543
Steam, W. T. 483                Ucelli, G. 509                 Woolley, C. L. 486-8
Stebbins, G. L. 215-16          Ucko, P. J. xxi, 544           Woolpy, J. H. 369, 378
Steele, J. H. 544               Unger, F. 133, 135, 141        Wright, H. E. 38, 42-3, 46,
Steensberg, C. M. 499           Ure, A. 198                     90, 96-7, 375-6
Stefaniszin, B. 128             Uspenskii, G. A. 108           Wright, H. T. 99
Steffensen, J. 534, 543                                        Wright, N. C. 520
Stenning, D. J. 262                                            Wright, W. 187, 195, 198
Stephens, S. G. 462             Valcdrcel, L. E. 448-9         Wrigley, C. 424
Stephenson, S. K. 520-1         Valdizan, H. 435, 440          Wu Ch’i-ch’ang 402
Stevenson, W. 424-5             Vardi, A. 66                   Wulff, H. E. 34
Steward, J. H. 439              Vats, M. S. 328                Wurzburg, O. B. 195-6
Stewart, L. 423                 Vaufrey, R. 267, 274           Wymer, J. J. 118
                                                                 Index of authors       581


Wynne-Edwards, C. V. 76,     Yeakel, E. H. 210, 215           Zeuner, F. E. 109, 207-8,
 96                          Yin Jan-chang 402                  211, 213, 215, 262, 313-14,
                             Young, T. C. 376                   319, 321-22, 337-8, 342,
                             Yu, C. M. 543                      344-5, 366, 370, 377-9,
Xuarex, G. 435, 438, 440-1   Yu Sheng-wu 401                    477-8, 488
                             Yudkin, J. 528-9, 552            Zohary, D. 35, 38, 45-6,
                             Yule, H. 197                       50-1, 54, 61, 65-6, 72, 80,
Yadin, Y. 477, 504, 520                                         97, 153, 162, 169, 172, 359,
Yarbrough, J. A. 439         Zapata Gollan, A. 440              375
Yarnell, R. A. 543           Zeist, W. van xxi, 38, 42, 46,   Zohary, M.     37, 42, 45-6,
Yazan, Y. 108                  96-7, 144, 147, 149, 158,        359
Yazdani, Gh. 34                161, 171, 376                  Zyl, J. H. M. van 108-9
date due
                              s 494.R47 1968
                             Research Seminar in Archa        010130 000
                             The domestication and exploita




                                           TRENT UNIVERSITY




  oct i ?              DATE DUE

                              jfw   A 0•
      L   %
   MAS              MAk 2 7 2 003
!-App-
    Ml (\ — —m—Z008
              P*   P


                     DECo; 2flfl3_L
   sea rc          u


 PETERBOROUGH ONTAR-
                 AR!0
             Aldine • Atherton
IIIMKIII



THE DOMESTICATION AND EXPLOITATION
OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS
                                                                                   t—

Edited by Peter J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby                                         [
 This book is a convincing example of productive co-operation between archaeology
and natural science to throw light on the central subject expressed in the title, and
consists of some 50 articles written by specialists in the disciplines of prehistory,
anthropology, botany, zoology, genetics, etc.... A mine of special information .. .
It should be read by all archaeologists, but will have a wider appeal.’   —Antiquity

‘...the best compilation available on the many ways to study the domestication,
use, and evolution of plants and animals. ... It should stimulate the study of the
relationships of man and his domesticates from diverse points of view. It is a
valuable reference work, but almost any chapter will make a casual reader view the
diverse products in his supermarket with new interest.’       —American Scientist

‘This is an important group of papers concerning problems surrounding the study
of the development of a controlled food supply. The topic is viewed primarily as a
set of problems in the context of the natural sciences rather than as a cultural
problem. Thus for the first time in recent years a large group of non-archaeological
specialists has organized itself for a critical review of the methods and logic used
in the evaluation of archaeological materials relating to botany and zoology. The
advantages of the wide background of experience represented by this group are
apparent in two ways: first, it provides a refreshing range of viewpoints regarding
the various questions raised, thereby offering alternate suggestions for methods of
analysis and interpretation; and secondly, it re-establishes a context for archaeo¬
logical data within the complex study of population, genetics and morphological
change as seen by the natural sciences themselves. The sophistication and caution
exhibited by specialists in these fields with regard to the meaning of the evidence
forms an important antidote to those archaeologists tempted to disregard the
inherent difficulties of interpretation in their search for a valid reconstruction of
cultural history.’                                          —American Anthropologist

’... a massive achievement both in the amount of factual evidence from many and
various lines of research discussed in close juxtaposition and in the number of
theories considered and elaborated on the basis of this evidence. As such, it must
surely become the standard work in its field and I am sure it will remain so for some
time to come.'                                          —Journal of Applied Ecology

’... an important collection of scholarly papers for the specialist, which will be of
interest not only to archaeologists and prehistorians but also to members of the
scientific disciplines who were represented at the meeting.’
                                                          —Advancement of Science

’... a book by and for specialists—the kind of book that will go on the list of every
university librarian. But because the theme of man's domestication of plants and
animals is not only fascinating but essentially simple, anyone can sample it with
enjoyment.’                                                              —Observer

'... a very good production, well set, with good maps, figures and plates and shows
the great value of the interdisciplinary approach ... full of important lessons for the
modern scientist and a joy to read.’                       —Tropical Science Quarterly

‘It will be compulsory reading for archaeologists for some years to come and also
makes delightful reading for the curious amateur.’               —Science Journal

‘An extremely important book for professional prehistorians as well as the scientific
specialists concerned with a fundamental turning-point in human and natural
history.’                                                      —British Book News
A cloth edition of this title is also available


ALDINE • ATHERTON, INC., 529 S. Wabash Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60605
