      Animal husbandry and the archaeologist

The interaction of material and non-material aspects of culture is always
complicated, and there is no space here for discussion of the effects of
dependence on animal husbandry on other aspects of social and economic
fife. However, in the present context a few comments of special relevance
to archaeology may be justified.
   That full pastoral nomadism leads to impoverishment of material culture
has often been remarked. Nomads must travel light. They are not likely to use
pottery, or numbers of metal vessels, or any but the simplest household goods.
Their dwellings must be portable. Non-functional art objects—made for
purely ritual or decorative purposes—are likely to be absent. Their clothing
and utensils are often made from animal products: skins, wool, horn, bone.
In the environments in which many of them five even wood is scarce.
   Many of their artefacts, being of perishable materials, would be unlikely to
survive in an archaeological context. This is true of all the devices shown
in Figs. 2 to 7.
   But this point must not be pressed too far. The more complete the direct
dependence of a people on their animals, as in the case of the Bedouin or the
Kazak, the more essential is contact with other peoples. I have said that all
nomads obtain some vegetable food. The Kazak obtained many other goods—
luxuries as well as necessities—from the towns or from itinerant traders. The
Bedouin trade their camels not only for grain but for rifles and ammunition,
cloth for their tents, and all sorts of utensils. Only the very poorest bedouin
families lack a set of vessels for preparing and serving coffee. Moreover,
although non-functional art may be lacking among such peoples, decora¬
tion is applied to harness-trappings and weapons and wealth may be con¬
verted into jewellery.
   Paradoxically, those whose dependence on their animals is less total are
sometimes more restricted in the range if not in the bulk of their material
culture, perhaps because being more self-sufficient they have less need to
establish contacts with other peoples. The Nuer provide an example.
   Settlement patterns, which are often relatively simple for peoples who live
mainly by agriculture, may become more complex when animal husbandry is
of greater economic importance. Most pastoral nomads have a base. The
Tuareg have the oases with their gardens where women, children and the
                       Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography      261


elderly remain and where craftsmen practise their trades. The Kazaks
spent the winter in scattered family groups in river-valley sites which were
clan property and to which they returned each year, living in semi-sub¬
terranean houses with turf or stone walls. There were also groups who
practised irrigation agriculture in the valleys and were permanentiy settled.
These included some poor Kazak families who lacked livestock as well as
people of different origins. The Lapps, too, have their settlements, occupied
mainly by the elderly, women and children, in more recent times in the
neighbourhood of “church villages”, where they made huts of sods supported
by a timber frame.
   The Rwala have no similar base. To some extent the villages of the desert
fringe, near which they camp during July and August, fulfil the same function.
However, some Rwala spend even these hottest months at desert water-holes.
They are the most completely nomadic of the peoples considered here.
   The Nuer, with a much more widely based economy, present a rather
different picture, but among them too the village sites, situated on sandy
ridges above flood level, are occupied only for part of the year. During
the early part of the dry season, when the floods have receded, the young
people lead a nomadic life with the herds while the elderly and the children
remain in the village and tend the crops. When the harvest is completed and
the pasture withers in the drought all congregate together at riverside camps,
returning to the villages as the floods rise again.
   Clearly village sites which are occupied permanently or for part of every
year could be expected to yield archaeological evidence. The same is true of
camping sites which for various reasons are occupied year after year: the
Rwala camp at wells, which are themselves artefacts, being made or improved
by man. But the route of the Kazak during spring and summer varies each
year according to the incidence of showers and, therefore, of pasture, and the
same is true of the herding groups of the Tuareg and the Rwala. Many of
their camp sites would leave little trace.
   If in a certain area evidence should be found for both a settled life and a
nomadic herding life, analogy with the peoples discussed here suggests that a
number of different explanations have to be considered. It could indicate the
presence of two distinct peoples each exploiting the natural environment in
different ways, as in the case of the Fulani and the settled peoples among
whom they move in the southern part of their range. It could result from
groups of the same people leading differently based lives, as in the case of the
Fulani and the Kazak, each of whom have settled elements. It could suggest a
life similar to that of the Tuareg, many of whom live permanently in the
oasis settlements while others tend the herds at great distances. Or it could
represent different phases of an annual cycle, as in the cases of the Nuer and
the nomadic Kazak.
   Animak are the only form of wealth which is self-mobile. People who
depend heavily on animals are, therefore, usually warlike, because they
262    Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals      CRANSTONE


have to be prepared to defend their herds. This is especially true of those
whose animals are able to travel far and fast: horses, camels, cattle. It is less
true of sheep and goat herders; and one rarely hears of raiders driving off
herds of pigs. People who herd the more mobile animals must themselves be
mobile. The Kazak and Tuareg mount their sheep and goat herders on oxen,
but clearly only horse- and camel-riders can herd horses and camels. It is this
mobility, combined with hardihood, which has caused the nomads to be
dreaded by the settled peoples throughout history. However they usually
threaten only their neighbours, for their way of life discourages the develop¬
ment of large political units or centralized control, and their chiefs are
unable to gather large numbers or to hold them together. It is only when
they have been welded into a coherent force by a leader of genius that they
have spread far from their own habitat.



       Notes
        1 Valuable background material will be found in Forde, C. D. (1964).
          Habitat, Economy and Society. London; Birket-Smith, K. (i960). Primitive
          Man and his Ways. London; Mourant, A. E. and Zeuner, F. E. (eds.)
          (1963). Man and Cattle. Roy. Anthrop. Inst., London; Zeuner, F. E.
          (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
        2 The mithan is usually considered to be the domesticated form of the gaur.
        3 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). Op. cit. pp. 253-5.
        4 Of course there are exceptions to any such generalizations. The pigs of
          the medieval villager certainly foraged in the woods and must surely have
          interbred with the wild pig.
        5 Stenning, D. J. (1959). Savannah Nomads. London.
       6 See, e.g. Mills, J. P. (1926). The Ao Nagas. London; Stonor, C. R. (1950).
          The feasts of merit among the Northern Sangtam tribe of Assam, Anthro-
          pos, 45.
       7 Layard, J. (1942). Stone Men of Malekula. London.
       8 Layard, J. (1942). Op. cit. p. 240.
       9 Baker, J. R. (1929). Man and Animals in the New Hebrides. London.
      10 Birket-Smith, K. (i960), ibid.; Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture
          of the Pastoral Tuareg. Nat. Mus. of Copenhagen.
      11 Musil, A. (1928). The Manners and Customs of the Rzvala Bedouins. New
          York.
      12 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit. ch. XVI.
      13 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit. ch. XIV.
      14 Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1940). The Nuer. Oxford.
      15 Birket-Smith, K. (i960), op. cit. p. 158.
      16 Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1940). op. cit. pp. 41-5.
      17 Collinder, B. (1949). The Lapps. Princeton, pp. 92-5.
      18 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit. ch. XVII.
      19 Gilmore, R. M. (1950). Fauna and ethnozoology of South America, in
          Steward, J. H. (ed.) Handbook of South American Indians, 6, pp. 429-54.
      20 For the animal-management techniques of the Tuareg, see, especially,
          Nicolaisen, J. (1963). ibid.
      21 Collinder, B. (1949). op. cit. p. 112.
      22 Gray, R. F. (1963). The Sonjo of Tanganyika. London, p. 40.
      23 Nicolaisen, J. (1963). op. cit. p. 70.
                      Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       263


    24 Amoroso, E. C. and Jewell, P. A. (1963). The exploitation of the milk-
       ejection reflex by primitive peoples, in Mourant, A. E. and Zeuner, F. E.
       (1963). ibid.
    25 Ashton, H. (1952). The Basuto. London, pp. 135-6.
    26 Schapera, I. (ed.) (1937). The Bantu-speaking Tribes of South Africa.
       London, pp. 137-41.
    27 Lagercrantz, S. (1950). East Hamitic milking customs, in Contribution to
       the Ethnography of Africa. Studia Etnografica Upsaliensia, 1, Lund.
    28 Stayt, H. A. (1931). The Bavenda. London, p. 39.
    29 Grunnet, N. T. (1962). An ethnographic-ecological survey of the relation¬
       ship between the Dinka and their cattle. Folk, 4.
    30 Collinder, B. (1949). op. cit. p. 91.
    31 Gray, R. F. (1963). op. cit. p. 40.
    32 Nicolaisen, J. (1963). op. cit. pp. 138-40 and Fig. 100.




10—dopaa *   *
     P. DUCOS

     Methodology and results of the study of the earliest
     domesticated animals in the Near East (Palestine)


     Introduction

The beginning of the domestication of animals established a new relationship
between man and animals which, over a certain time, introduced on the one
hand changes in domesticated species which took on new morphological
characteristics, and on the other hand an evolution of human culture in which
new ways of life were adopted as a response to the success in gaining control
of a part of the essential meat supply. In order to assess objectively the
beginnings of domestication it is necessary to concentrate on this very re¬
lationship; it is clear that anatomical features cannot serve to reveal the
beginnings of domestication for domesticated species only undergo trans¬
formation after a considerable number of generations, while indirect archae¬
ological evidence (equipment, architecture, a sedentary existence) is not
sufficient to actually prove primitive domestication.
   In order to investigate the beginnings of domestication in Palestine we
have applied a method which uses neither archaeological nor anatomical data.
Some of the general principles of this method were announced in 1961 and
detailed applications have since been fully published1. To summarize, the
method of acquiring animals (in an ethnological sense) can be ascertained
numerically from analysis of bone collections. The data is of different kinds
and new criteria can be isolated: the frequency of different parts of the
skeleton, the frequency of species, the frequency of different age groups,
are the criteria which we used in our analyses, the two last being the most
important.



      Review of Palestinian prehistory

Following the microlithic industries of the Palestinian Mesolithic (known as
the Natufian) come the first neolithic assemblages, which were found by
Garstang in his famous excavation at Jericho. Jericho, with its stratigraphy
266   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     DUCOS


subsequently confirmed and made more precise by Miss K. Kenyon, remains
one of the type sites for Palestinian prehistory.
  Two Pre-Pottery Neolithic levels (PPN-A and PPN-B), dated by C-14 to
the eighth and the seventh millennium respectively, are followed by a
Pottery Neolithic which is contemporary with the Middle Neolithic of Byblos,
in other words which is dated to the middle of the fifth millennium. On this
evidence there was a break of more than a thousand years in the stratigraphy
of Jericho.
   Perrot’s work at Hagoshrim and Beisamun and his excavations at Munhata
at first suggested that these sites filled the break in the Jericho sequences, but
detailed analysis of the material has shown that the same hiatus does exist at
Munhata; levels 3-6 are contemporary with PPN-B at Jericho, while
Munhata 2 is already contemporary with the Middle Neolithic of Byblos,
and therefore does not pre-date the Pottery Neolithic of Jericho. As the other
sites (Hagoshrim and Beisamun) can be dated to the fifth miUennium it is
necessary to accept this break as common to the whole valley of the Jordan.
   In Palestine the fourth millennium is the period of the Ghassoulian which
was found by Neuville and Mallon at the site of Teleilat-Ghassoul on the
banks of the Dead Sea and which is now better known from Perrot’s excava¬
tions at Beersheba. The Ghassoulian corresponds to the “Chalcolithic” with
metal objects appearing for the first time in a context which otherwise is
essentially still Neolithic.



      Research into the beginnings of animal domestication

Bone assemblages from Ghassoulian sites show that at this time (the fourth
millennium) the different Palestinian cultures knew and practised animal
domestication in a form which one cannot call archaic. On the one hand the
domesticated species are already very different from wild species: catde are
small and very similar to the brachyceros breed; pigs are smaller than any
wild forms of Sus scrofa with certain new cranial characteristics which class
them with turbary pig, although there are certain differences between them;
sheep are heavier than turbary sheep; goats have twisted horns and are also
smaller than wild bezoar goats. On the other hand analysis of the distribution
curves of age groups shows that animals were not only killed for food, but
were also kept for their milk and wool; a considerable number of young
animals were killed. Finally, a comparison of the different sites indicates a
tendency to specialization in animal domestication; on the one hand cattle
and pigs, and sheep and goats on the other. This is a complex picture and
shows that the beginnings of domestication must have been prior to the fourth
millennium and that investigation of the beginnings of animal domestication
must concentrate on the populations which lived after the archaeological
 hiatus of the sixth millennium (Pottery Neolithic) or even on those which
                          The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East       267

preceded the hiatus (Pre-Pottery Neolithic and Natufian). Some of the recent
excavations by the French archaeological mission in Israel have offered the
opportunity to study this problem under particularly fruitful conditions, for
several sites have been excavated which were very rich in animal bones.
These sites fall within a well-defined geographical area, the upper valley of
the Jordan at the levels of lakes Tiberias and Hulah, and they date from both
before and after the archaeological hiatus. This communication is concerned
with the preliminary analyses of this series of excavations which have only
just been completed.
   The period before the archaeological hiatus is represented at Ai'n Mallaha
and in the lower levels (3-6) at Munhata; the period following the hiatus
(the Pottery Neolithic) is represented at Hagoshrim, Beisamun and level 2 at
Munhata.
   Table 1 summarizes the different proportions of species found at the
various sites.


                          Ain           Munhata
                         Mallaha         5-6      Hagoshrim   Beisamun   Munhatta 2

Cervids                    33-4          rare        3-8         1-7         o-o
Gazelles                   44-6          34-1       119          7-2        21-4
Cattle                      3'3          (4-9)      63-5        35-9        187
Large Caprinae(6)           1-6          45-5       14-2        29-4        26-9
Small Caprinae              O             0          0           0          13-3
Pigs                       142           ii-i        56         24-4        15-2
  (a) The proportions given for Munhata 5-6 are still provisional and may have to be
      modified to a certain extent after further analysis.
  (b) Capra hircus + Ovis orientalis.


Table 1 The proportions of different species(<1>


   The presence of Ovis orientalis requires some explanation, for the existence
of this species has never been mentioned in scientific publications on
Palestine. However, it must be borne in mind that Bate’s2 and Vaufrey’s3
studies of prehistoric fauna are not particularly illuminating in this respect.
It is of course very difficult to distinguish morphologically between Ovis and
Capra except on the basis of a few parts of the skeleton. In the series described
by Bate there is only one single bone which is distinctive of Capra, that is the
ankle bone of hircus type. In the Judean desert collections described by
Vaufrey4 there is not a single distinctive piece and Vaufrey writes “it seems
that the bones are those of ibex”.
   If one considers, for example, the scatter diagram of Caprinae first phalanges
at Munhata 5-6 (Fig. 1) it is clear that two species of large Caprinae are
present. The same scatter diagram is obtained for Munhata 2 with, in
addition, a clustering which corresponds with the small Caprinae; these latter
are virtually the only ones found in the Ghassoulian. Scatter diagrams for
Beisamun are similar to those of Munhata 5-6. The large Caprinae include
268   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    DUCOS




            o /Aunhata           z
 Fig i Scatter diagram of Caprinae first phalanges.
      The interrupted line shows the distribution of phalanges of small Caprinae
      from Bir-es-Safadi (Capra hircus and Ovis aries). The existence of two
      species of large Caprinae is clear. Small Caprinae only appear in Munhata 2.

 two species: the larger one is Capra hircus and the other belongs to the genus
 Ovis, for horn cores have been found at Munhata, admittedly not securely
 stratified, and also at Beisamun where their stratigraphic position is certain.
 A study of these horn cores shows that they belong to a sheep of the urial
 group and of the species Ovis orientalis.
    The first point to be noticed is the decrease in frequency of the cervids;
                       The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East    269

whereas they are very plentiful in the Natufian of Ain Mallaha, they are not
found in Munhata 2. This decrease is so marked that we cannot just infer
less emphasis on hunting; what must have occurred was a general decrease of
cervids in Palestine (they are found again on later sites, but are always
few) probably due to the disappearance of forest. We cannot argue in the
same way about the gazelle which maintained its important position, especi¬
ally at Munhata, the southernmost site and the one which is therefore closest
to the semi-arid zone.
   Other features to be noted in Table 1 are:

1 the increase of cattle in Pottery Neolithic sites;
2 the increase of Caprinae from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic onwards;
3 the more or less constant proportions of pigs;
4 the exceptional nature of Hagoshrim with its very high proportion of cattle;
5 the presence of small Caprinae at Munhata 2; a demonstration of this can
  be illustrated by a comparison of the first phalanges of the Caprinae from
  Munhata 2 with those from Munhata 5-6.

   None of the animals at Ain Mallaha were domesticated. It is only possible
to determine age groups for gazelles and boars and these are similar to
those for wild populations except for the rarity of young animals up to one
year old, a feature which can easily be explained with reference to actual
hunting tradition. Cervids, gazelles and pigs make up more than 90% of
the species found, and it is unreasonable to suggest that one of the species
which is found only rarely at this site (for example, cattle) should have
been domesticated.
   At Munhata 5-6 pigs are slightly less frequent than at Ain Mallaha and
cattle only just more frequent. The large Caprinae, which are very frequent,
reveal an age distribution which is rather different from that of wild popula¬
tions, with maxima for the classes between 1-2 years and between 2-4 years.
However, a X2 test, which measures the probability that this difference is not
due to chance, shows that this is not significant (13-93)- The age groups of
pigs at Beisamun is very similar to that at Ain Mallaha (X2 = 9-95); the
distribution of cattle there is like a wild distribution except for the rarity of
the group of animals between 2-4 years and the abundance of animals
between 4-6-5 years; finally, the distribution of Caprinae is similar to a wild
distribution with a X2 of 10-69 which is not significant.
   The only age group distribution which can be determined at Hagoshrim is
for cattle, and this is very different from a natural distribution (A2 = 40-04).
Young animals are rare (less than 10%), old animals practically non-existent,
and the bulk of the animals found are adults of between 4-9 years old. This
exceptional distribution goes hand in hand with a particularly high pro¬
portion of cattle.
   The distribution of pigs at Munhata 2 is very different from that of both
Ain Mallaha and Beisamun and is characterized by a very high proportion of
270   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals       ducos

individuals less than one year old. The distribution is similar to that of the
chalcolithic site of Metzer. The X2 is significant (44-46). The distribution
of cattle is identical to that at Beisamun (X2 = 8-35); that of Caprinae
accentuates the characteristics of the distribution of this group at Munhata
5-6, but this time with a highly significant X2 (94'°5)-
  The interpretation of these results will include comparative material from
other sites but from the outset will be based on one observation. For each of
the three groups there are two fundamental distribution types:
1 for the pigs (Fig. 2), a distribution which is close to a wild distribution
  (Mallaha, Beisamun) and a distribution with a markedly high proportion
  (more than 40%) of individuals under one year of age (Munhata 2,
  chalcolithic Metzer).

   pjgS                                    -      Munhata     2       ,X   =   44.46

                                            __    Beisamurv           )X =     9- 95




 2 for catde (Fig. 3), a distribution which is similar to a wild distribution
   with, nevertheless, a paucity of the age group 2-4 years which appears to
   be compensated by an abundance of the age group 4-6-5 years. This distri¬
   bution type is found also at Beisamun, Munhata 2 and elsewhere at Tell
   Mureybat (Syria, Pre-Pottery), in Ghassoulian sites and in Bronze Age
   Palestine. There is also a distribution with a clear peak where practically all
   the animals are adults, and this is the distribution type at Hagoshrim, at
   £atal Hiiyiik (Anatolia), and at Roucadour (France, Neolithic) for the
   brachyceros breed (whereas at this latter site the primigenius breed has a
   distribution of the first sort).
                         The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East       271

3 for the Caprinae (Fig. 4), there are two different distributions as for cattle.
  The distribution which is similar to the wild one is found at Beisamun and
  also at Bir-es-Safadi (Ghassoulian); the distribution with a maximum of
  age groups 1-3 years is found at Munhata 2 and perhaps also at Munhata
  5-6.

  The pig distribution which shows a clear peak of young animals under one
year of age clearly indicates domestication based on the consumption of very
young animals and the preservation of some adult animals for purposes of
reproduction.

                                               Hagoshrim                   -    40.04

                                               Munhata                      =   8.35

                                               Beisamun                X2,      25.0




                                                                                 ).033




Fig 3 The age group distribution of Bos taurus.
      The hatched zone represents either hunting activities or evolved husbandry.


   It is the distribution of cattle at Hagoshrim, and at £atal Hiiyiik, which
proves domestication, for the difference from a wild distribution cannot be
explained in any other way. On the other hand the other distribution type is
less conclusive. To see in this distribution type the results of hunting activities
is not satisfactory for the same distribution type is found in Bronze Age
sites such as Tel Gat and Tel Nagila where it is impossible that hunting
occurred, not only because these were urbanized civilizations but also
because in this southern area at this time (Tel Nagila is in the semi-arid
zone) no wild cattle existed. It is also difficult to infer the effects of domestica¬
tion from this distribution, for after all, is this not the same distribution
type as found at Tell Mureybat (Pre-Pottery, North Syria) where cattle are
272   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     DUCOS


considerably less frequent than an animal of genus Equus which must at this
time have been wild and where we are without doubt dealing with the activities
of hunters ?
   It is therefore necessary to admit that the significance of this second
distribution type is still unclear and that two sorts of activity could have
resulted in such a distribution. Such a convergence is not difficult to under¬
stand; that hunting should reveal a distribution close to the wild distribution
is consistent with the principles of the method. However, when we are dealing
with an evolved type of animal domestication, such as at Tel Gat, it is
probable that there was a difference in the exploitation of male and female
animals. The females would have been kept for their milk and for reproductive
purposes whereas the males would have been killed while still young and

                                           Beisctmun                T=     AO. 69

                                           Munhata      2                 94.05

                                                                          43.93
                                                                    *'■

                                                                    T-     31.25




only a few adults would have been kept to ensure reproduction. In this way
the distribution curve is made up of these two independent and inverse
distributions (that of the males and that of the females) so that the deficiencies
of one are compensated for by the abundances of the other with the result
that overall it becomes similar to a wild distribution.
   The same arguments can be applied to the Caprinae distributions to which
the same domestication practices apply. To explain the significance of cattle
at Munhata, at Beisamun, and the significance of Caprinae at Beisamun, we
must consider some other factors.
   The domestication of cattle at Hagoshrim (and also at £atal Hiiyuk) is of
an archaic kind; its only aim was to provide meat and the absence of young
                       The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East     273

animals shows a great reluctance to kill animals which had not yet con¬
tributed to the increase of the herd. It follows that it is difficult to conceive
that cattle should have been domesticated in a more sophisticated and
efficient way at Beisamun and Munhata 2 for these two sites are not much
later in date, the proportion of cattle at Munhata 2 is fairly low, and the
proportion of gazelles shows that hunting was still important. In the same way
we must admit that the Caprinae at Beisamun were hunted for their
domestication at Munhata 2 is still of an archaic type.



      Conclusion

We can now summarize the evidence for the beginnings of animal domestica¬
tion in Palestine.
   In the Pottery Neolithic period, after the archaeological hiatus, we find
on the one hand hunters, as at Beisamun, and on the other hunter-pastoralists,
as at Munhata 2 where the domestication was of Caprinae and pigs and at
Hagoshrim where a kind of cattie specialization may have occurred. In the
Pre-Pottery Neolithic period and in the Natufian animal domestication does
not appear to have existed, except perhaps in the case of the Caprinae
at Munhata 5-6 (about which it is not possible to be definite at the
moment).
   These conclusions refer to a clearly defined geographical area, the Upper
Jordan valley, from Lake Tiberias to Lake Houlah. How can they be reconciled
with what is known about the semi-arid zone where an earlier domestication
has been identified by myself at El Khiam and by Perkins at Beidha ? It is
absurd to suggest that domestication was known in southern Palestine in the
seventh millennium, then disappeared and only reappeared again in the fifth
millennium. This situation takes us to an hypothesis about the archaeological
hiatus of the sixth millennium. This hiatus may perhaps correspond to a
decrease in population density in the area, but it seems excessive to suggest
the total disappearance of people from Palestine during this period. The
hiatus could equally well correspond to a period of proto-husbandry which
would be the activity of nomadic populations. Such people would leave so
few remains that archaeologists would only recognize them under exceptional
circumstances. Dining the fifth millennium the Upper Jordan valley would
have seen the transition to settled agriculture, possibly as a result of contacts
between newcomers and existing nomadic populations. This is of course
only an hypothesis whose truth can only be confirmed in two ways: by the
discovery of some sixth millennium habitation sites in Palestine, and by the
study of domestication in the Neolithic settlements of the Syria-Lebanon
zone.
   It is important, finally, to note the separate existence of houses and villages
on the one hand, and animal domestication on the other. It is not possible to
274   Part // Domestication and exploitation of animals        ducos

see domestication as the result of a sedentary way of life, for villages existed
for several thousands of years before domestication occurred. In the same way
it is necessary to note that the domestication of animals does not appear to
have been the result of an increase in aridity which reduced the availability of
wild fauna. If the decrease in the number of cervids argues for a decrease in
forestation, then the increase in the number of cattle and wild Caprinae
argues for a climate which was perhaps more humid than in the Natufian.
The fact that the cultures which settled in Palestine were diversified, with
differing food-producing bases, proves that we should find elsewhere older
groups of people practising domestication, perhaps even in the sixth millen¬
nium. It remains true, nevertheless, that the domesticated species at Munhata
2 and at Hagoshrim are very similar to wild forms (it is only at Munhata 2
that we find some Caprinae which are smaller than wild forms and these
cannot have been the only ones to have been domesticated) which shows
that, although it is probable that there were older centres of domestication,
the upper regions of the Jordan valley were a focus of domestication in the
fifth millennium B.C.5




      Notes
       1 Ducos, P. (1965). Contribution a l’etude des origines de la domestication,
         Thesis, Faculte des Sciences de Bordeaux; Ducos, P. (1968). L’origine
         des animaux domestiques en Palestine, Pub. de Ulnst. de Prehist. de
         PUniv. de Bordeaux, 4.
       2 Bate, D. M. A. (1937). The fossil fauna of the Wadi-al-Mughara caves,
         in Garrod, D. A. E. The Stone Age of Mount Carmel, I. Oxford, pp. 134-
         240.
       3 Vaufrey, R. (1951). Etude paleontologique, I. Mammiferes, in Neuville, R.
         Le Paleolithique et le Mesolithique du Desert de Judee, Arch, de VInst, de
         PaUontologie Humaine, 24, pp. 198-217.
       4 Vaufrey, R. (1951). ibid.
       5 I must specify my position on the use of trinomials in referring to domesti¬
         cated animals. The argument against using sub-specific names for domesti¬
         cated animals depends on the fact that their differentiation is of a different
         kind from the different geographical forms of wild species. But such an
         argument leads to paradoxical postulates. If one calls wild cattle Bos
         primigenius and domesticated cattle Bos taurus, it follows that one accepts
         that domestication of the species primigenius has led to morphological
         changes which resulted in a new species, taurus, and one cannot deny the
         possibility that domestication has in addition led to the creation of sub¬
         species. The opposite approach which would call the domestic pig Sus
         scrofa is also paradoxical, for 22 sub-species of wild Sus scrofa are recog¬
         nized. Domesticated pigs differ morphologically from all the wild sub¬
         species even more than do the wild forms between themselves and surely
         these domesticated pigs can be considered as one or more sub-species.
             Bohlken, H. (1961). Haustiere und Zoologische Systematik, Z.
          Tierziicht. ZuchtBiol., 76 (1), pp. 107-13, has shown the necessity of
          using a trinomial classification for domesticated animals and has proposed
          a scheme which, although subject to discussion, has the merit of showing
              The earliest domesticated animals in the Near East    275

the phylogeny of these forms. Until general agreement is reached, I
would prefer to use a trinomial classification in deference to the rules
agreed in the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.
  In view of the editorial policy adopted throughout this book, I have
agreed not to use the trinomial nomenclature. The terms primigenius and
brachyceros are used here as subspecific names, and the large Caprinae
Capra hircus is, in fact, Capra hircus aegagrus.
      CAROLINE GRIGSON

       The uses and limitations of differences in absolute size
      in the distinction between the bones of aurochs
      (Bos primigenius) and domestic cattle (Bos taurus)

      Introduction

 One of the most obvious differences between domestic and wild cattle is that
the domestic cattle (Bos taurus, in this case) are almost all smaller than their
wild ancestor, the aurochs (Bos primigenius). Bohlken1 showed how very
close wild and domestic taurine cattle are in their skull characters; indeed he
saw no reason for their classification as separate species. Fig. i, in which
measurements of some aurochs cows have been added to Bohlken’s graph of
basal length plotted against palatal length for aurochs bulls and modern
domestic cattle of both sexes, shows that in spite of some overlap a reduction
in size is one of the most obvious effects of domestication. The question there¬
fore arises whether it is justifiable to use small size as diagnostic for domestica¬
tion when cattle bones are excavated from archaeological sites.
   It must first be stressed that this paper is not concerned with the formula¬
tion of a general principle on the effect of domestication, but merely with the
distinction between the bones of B. taurus and B. primigenius.
   Comparisons between the dimensions of various bone samples are best
made with statistical methods as used by Kurten, Simpson and others2. It
has been argued that measurements of bones from archaeological sites cannot
be used in calculations that require random samples because the animals
were probably selected for killing. However some bias occurs in most
palaeontological samples as the bones may get sorted (a) while the animals
are still alive, (b) by burial or fossilization, (c) by exposure, and (d) by collec¬
tion3. In the case of an archaeological sample of bones bias due to the first
of these categories would have been caused by man (though perhaps less by
hunting than by stock-rearing activities) but, on the other hand, bias due to
the other possible causes is often minimized.
   Correct identification of genus is obviously of the first importance. The
bones most likely to be confused with those of B. taurus and B. primigenius
Basal length
                             Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle   279

belong to the bison, but distinctive criteria for many parts of the skeleton
have been worked out by Stampfli4. There are so few reports of post-glacial
bison in Northern Europe, and those that do exist are from very early post¬
glacial times in Denmark and nearby5, that the possible occasional presence
of bison of a post-glacial date is very unlikely to interfere with the validity of
the calculations. However bison were present in Switzerland (for example,
some were identified by Stampfli at Burgaschisee-Sud6) and probably also in
other parts of central and southern Europe.



      Possible factors influencing the size of the aurochs

      Sexual dimorphism and intrinsic variation


The remains have been found in Europe of two different forms of B. primi-
genius which differ from each other mainly in size. Rutimeyer7 considered
that domestic cattle of the “primigenius type” were descended from the
aurochs and that “brachyceros” domestic cattle were descended from a
smaller wild ancestor yet to be discovered. Hitscher8 was the first to describe
a small skull of B. primigenius} which he considered to be from a young
animal. The same skull (and other similar ones) were variously described as
adult dwarfs9, as wild “Bos brachyceros europaeus”10, as domestic Bos taurus
primigeniusu, and as a small wild “Bos urus minutus”12. Hilzheimer13 was the
first to suggest that the small skulls might be from aurochs cows, a view
which was confirmed by Leithner14, who identified several aurochs cow skulls
and one complete skeleton, and in spite of much controversy this view has
come to be generally accepted on the Continent.
   The position is not however the same in Britain: Jackson15 writing on the
aurochs skulls from Maiden Castle does not seem to have considered sexual
dimorphism as a possible reason for their rather small size, and Bilton16
re-identified the B. primigenius skull from Preston (Manchester Museum No.
LL 144A) as domesticated and did not mention sex as a possible explanation
for its relatively small size. The sexual dimorphism of the remains of aurochs
from the mesolithic site of Star Carr is so doubtfully suggested in the report17
that some authors18 interpret the results as indicating that there were two
different varieties of aurochs in Britain. Shawcross19 compared a large. Bronze
Age, aurochs skeleton with the remains of the smaller Star Carr aurochs with¬
out any suggestion that the difference between them might be sexual; on the
other hand Jewell20 considered that the two sizes of aurochs found in Britain
are male and female, as on the continent.
   The author21 has drawn up provisional size ranges for many skull and
some limb bone measurements for male and female aurochs in northern
Europe in post-glacial times. A sexual dimorphism is obvious in almost all the
measurements, the cows being the smaller. In most cases this is only a partial
280   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals       grigson

dimorphism22, as the size ranges overlap, but nevertheless the ranges form a
basis for the sexing of aurochs remains.
  The aurochs was a rather variable animal, and this is particularly true of
the skull where the variability is aggravated by wide sexual dimorphism.
Some examples of the degree of variation are illustrated in Table i.


   Country             Measurement             Sex    Number     Mean       V
                                                                 mm.

N. Europe    length of front of skull           3        24     685         4-9
N. Europe    length of front of skull           9         7     600         5-i
N. Europe    length of front of skull         both       3i     670         6-7
N. Europe    maximum occipital height           3        46     219         5-0
N. Europe    maximum occipital height           9        20     186         6-7
N. Europe    maximum occipital height         both       66     211        10-3
Britain      maximum length astragulus        both       12      87-08      4-28
Denmark      maximum length astragulus        both       31      87-52      4-96
Hungary      maximum length astragulus        both       96      84-12      4-81


Table i Coefficients of variation for various measurements of post-glacial
     Bos primigenius.
     Measurements from Leithner, O. F. (1927). Der Ur, Ber. int. Ges. Erhaltung
     des Wisents, 2, pp. 1-140, and Grigson, C. (In preparation).
     The means and standard deviations were calculated from probability paper
     plots (Harding, J. P. (1949). The use of probability paper for graphical
     analysis of polymodal frequency distributions, J. mar. biol. Ass. U.K., 28,
     pp. 141-53.)


  Various skull measurements of the two sexes taken separately, including
those listed in Table 1, lie on straight lines when plotted on probability paper,
showing that they were normally distributed—there is no suggestion that
either the male or female group could be sub-divided on the basis of size,
which strengthens the view that the existence of two size groups is merely
the expression of a sexual dimorphism23.

      Geological age


There is some evidence, in Germany at least, that the aurochs was larger
during the Pleistocene than in post-Pleistocene times24. British material has
not been studied in detail and the situation is complicated by the assumption
that the B. primigenius skulls in the British Museum (Natural History) are
Pleistocene in date- ' although, in fact, the early dating of some of them is very
doubtful: the Kirkcudbrightshire skull (36405) is labelled “turbary deposit”,
the Twickenham skull (M5970) was “dredged from the Thames” and the
Atholl skull (M2245) is marked “Pleistocene ?”; they are about the same size
as those of definitely recent date in Denmark; but the undoubted Pleisto¬
cene specimens from Ilford are certainly enormous. The magnificent late-
glacial skull from Faaborg (University Zoological Museum, Copenhagen)
seems to belong to the Pleistocene rather than the Recent size group.
                              Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle   281


   However it is the possible decrease in size during the post-Pleistocene period
that is of more practical importance. Degerbol26 has produced a chart of
various measurements of skulls and bones from complete skeletons of B.
primigenius in Denmark which suggest that there was a slight decrease in size
between the Pre-Boreal and Sub-Boreal periods. However when this chart is
expanded (Figs. 2 and 2a) with measurements from archaeological sites and
with recently dated skulls and skeletons (especially the Bronze Age skeleton
from Lowes Farm27) from Denmark, N.W. Germany, and England no such
diminution is apparent. Therefore it seems likely that the aurochs did not de¬
crease in size in northern Europe between the Mesolithic and the Bronze Age.



      Isolation

Interbreeding forms that are inter-fertile cannot diverge if they are able to
breed freely, so that groups of animals of smaller stature than the members of
the main population could only be set up if they were to be isolated from that
population in one way or another. The main kinds of natural isolation are
geographical, distance, ecological, and biological, but domestication by man
might mimic the effects of natural isolation28.

     Geographical isolation


The past distribution of B. primigenius was extremely wide, ranging from
N.W. Europe and N. Africa through Russia into eastern Asia, and into the
Near East. Its eastern and southern extensions are still not clear partly
because of the possibility of the spread of B. namadicus outside its Indian
range; the distribution is particularly doubtful for the post-Pleistocene period.
It is certainly possible that populations of aurochs could have become
geographically isolated in particularly difficult or mountainous country
within this huge area (as seems to have happened with another large ox—the
kouprey {Bibos sauveli) in the mountains of the Laos-Cambodian border). A
form of geographical isolation more likely to have occurred could have been
on islands; for example, the aurochs remained on some of the Danish islands
after they had become separated from the mainland. It has been said29 that
the reduction in gene flow caused by island isolation is likely to result in a
decrease in stature in large mammals, including artiodactyls. However, if size
changes occur as a result of geographical isolation the measurements of
animals from such a population would still be normally distributed.

     Distance isolation


Size differences might be expected to exist between potentially interbreeding
animals which, although forming part of the same continuous geographical
  282           Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals                                                                   GRIGSON


                                                                                                      D                                          (4]
                                                                  (1)            D                                                               (4)
                                               (.1)   (1)   (1)
                                                                  (2)                                                  roronro                   (4)
                                                                                                                                                 (5j
                                                                  (2)            D (1)                E (la)
                                                                                                                                                 (3
                                                                                                                                                 (6
                                                                  (2)
                                                                  (1)                                                                            (6
                                                                                 D
                                                                                                      E (la)
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                       cb cb cb cb
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                         E
                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               D
                                               E
                                               E
                                               E
                                               D                                 D                                                       E
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                         E

                                                                                 Ronnebaeksholm
                                               Stokholthusene                                                                            0rting
                                               Vig                                                                                       /stbirk
                                               Goderupsgaard




                               Faaborg 111
                                                                                                                                         Pindstrup
                                               Graenge                           Khahstrup                                               Maiden Castle
                                               Graenge                                                Langeland        M X ^ X           Maiden Castle
                                                                                                                        o Q) 0) d)
                                               Graenge                                                                                   Maiden Castle
                                                                                 Paahorg V
      w                                                                                                                £2 p        ,0
      EH                                       Star Carr                                              East Ham          U ^ £-i fn
                                                                                                                        Q) Q) d) <D
                                                                                                                                         Bunds/
      M                                        Star Carr                                                                                 Barkholmer
      m                                                                                                                I—1 1—1 1—1 1—1
                                                                                 Ullerslev            East Ham
                                               Star Carr                                                               H r—1 H H         County Farm
                                               Vigersted                                                                W W w w          Lowes Farm

                  mm

                  610    -
      3           600    -     ©                                                         ©
      5           590    -
                                                                                 ©                                                                                   ©
      §           580    -
      m           570    '
      Eh          560    -
      g           550    -                                                                                                               9
      w           540    -                                                                            ©
      *
      3
                  530
                  520
                         -
                         -
                                                                                             o                                               ©                  •

      m           510    -                            #
      m           500    -
                                                                  O
                  490    -
                  480    -



                   400   -     9
                   390   -
                   380   -
                   370   -
      w            360   -
      3            35° -                                                         •                                          ®
      3            340 -                                                                              9
      w            330 -
                                                                                                                       ©        ®
      |            320 -
      1            310 -
      §            300 -                                    ©                        ©
      S            290 -
                   280 -
      5            270 -                                                                     0
      ^            260 ~
       m           250 -
       w           240 -                                                                                                                             ®
       g
       o
                   230 -
                   220 -
                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                          o
       g           210 -                                          o°°                                                                                o
       2           200 -
                   190 -                                                0
                   180 -                                                                                                                         o
                   170 -

      E-l ffi
      ou           190   -
                   180   -     ©
      fi^          170   -                       @®®®«                                     •
      E=r          160   -                                                       ®           o ©                                                                •    •
       eg          150   -

                              111'                          IV                         V          Vll                   Vll/Vlll                         Vlll
■POTJ.-RN       Danish
ZONES           English                                               1V-V                                  Vila                                                    Vlld

                Climatic      Late                    Pre-Boreal                 early            Atlantic Atlantic/                             Sub-Boreal
PERIOD                       Glacial                                             Boreal                    Sub-Boreal
                Archaeo¬
                                                                        Mesolithic                                                       Neolithic & Bronze
                 logical
                                                                                                  1                1                                                       V
Very approximate                                                                                                                                                         4<)0
                                             8, 000                                          6,000                         3,000
Dates BC



    Figs 2 and 2a. The size of Bos primigenius in Northern Europe in post¬
    glacial times.
                The measurements of many dated skulls and metapodials plotted according
                to their pollen dates show that there is no reason to suppose that the aurochs
                decreased in size between Pre-Boreal and Sub-Boreal times.
                   D: Danish, E: English, G: North German.
                   ®: bulls, O: cows, (•): sex uncertain.
                                   Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle                              283


                                                                                     E (la)         (4a)

                                 Stokholthusene D (1)
                                                                     (1)
                                                                     (1)                            (6)
                                                                     (1)                            (7)
                                                                     (1)
                                                                     (1)             D (5a)         (7)
                                                                                                    (7)
                                                        D            D
                                                                     D
                                                                     D
                                                                     D
                                                                     D               D (5a)      D
                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                 E

                                 Vig            D
                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                 E


                                                                     Svaerdborg
                                 Graenge        D
                                                                                                 Pindstrup



                                                        Ullerslev
                                                                                     East Ham
     SITE
                                                                     Svaerdborg                  Woodhenge
                                                                     Svaerdborg                  Lowes Harm
                                                                                     Dyrholmen   Snail Down
                                 Star Carr      E (l)
                                                                     Holnegaard
                                                                                                 Snail Down
                                                                     Holmegaard      Dyrholmen   Snail Down
            tu       mm
    p5 g             270 -
                     260 - ©
    5                250 -                m
                                                                     O
                                                                     O               @
                     240 -                              O           ©
                     230 -                      @                            O                   0         ®o
    fSi


                     300    -
    gw               290    -                                                                         ®
                     280    -                           O
    < •              270    -                                                                    O®
    en W
    .w jj


                                  IV                    V               VI               Vll Vlll
                 Dan:'-sh
ZONES            English                  1V-V                                    Vila              Vlld

                 Climatic        Pre-
                                                                    Boreal        Atlantic Sub-Boreal
FERIOD                          Boreal
                 Archaeo¬                                                                        Neolithic
                  logical                               Mesolithic                               & Bronze

Very approximate
                                                                               4-             '               N '/
                                )8,000                                       6,000         3, 300           40 0
Dates BC

   (Chart and all measurements based on Degerbol, M. (1962). Ur und Hausrind,
   Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 76 (2-3), pp. 243-51, except where otherwise stated.
   1: author, ia: Banks, C. (1961). Report on the recently discovered remains
   of the wild ox {Bos primigenius Bojanus) from East Ham, London Naturalist,
   41, pp. 54-8, 2: Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954)- Faunal remains, in
   Clark, J. G. D. Excavations at Star Carr. Cambridge, pp. 70-95. 3: Requate,
   H. (1957). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures {Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827) nach
   Schadel- und Skelettfunden in Schleswig-Holstein. Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol.,
   70, pp. 297-338. 4: Jackson, J. W. (1943). Animal bones—1 Neolithic, in
   Wheeler, R. E. M. Maiden Castle, Dorset, London, pp. 360-7. 5: Degerbol,
   M. (1939). Dyreknogler, in Mathiassen T. Bundso en yngre Stenalders
   Boplads paa Als, Aarboger for Nordisk Oldkundighed og Historie 1939. pp.
   85-198. 5a: Mathiassen, T., Degerbol, M. and Troels-Smith, J. (1942).
   Dyrholmen. En stenaldersboplads paa Djursland.i^/. Dansk. Vid. Selskab.
   Arkaeol.-kunsthist. 1. 6: Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). The
   excavation of a Bos primigenius at Lowe’s Farm, Littleport, Proc. Camb. Ant.
   Soc., 54, pp. 3-16. 7: Jewell, P. (forthcoming.))
284   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals        grigson


distribution, were actually prevented from interbreeding by a great physical
distance between them. The author, using various measurements, has pre¬
pared histograms of the size of the bones of post-glacial B. primigenius in
various area (e.g. Figs. 3-5), although not all the measurements are available
from each of the areas. The histograms suggest a close similarity in size
between the aurochs found in different parts of N.W. Europe (Sweden,
Denmark, Schleswig-Holstein, and Britain). Although the number of
measurements available is rather small (except for the Danish material) it has
been possible, in some cases, to apply tests of statistical difference. The results
are given in Table 2 and show that there is no significant difference between

                                         Mean                          Probability
  Country        Measurement     No.     (mm.)    s (mm.)       t     outside limits

Britain      least breadth        II    220-45    29-32     \     0
Denmark      frontal                    220-65                           >90%
                                  23              31-50     I0'01?8

Britain      maximum              12     87-08
                                                   ^       0-3091        70-80%
Denmark      length               3i     87-52     4-3426/
Hungary      astragulus           96     84-12     4-0447 3-997          <o-i%


Table 2    A comparison of bone sizes of post-glacial Bos primigenius from
      different areas.
      The table shows no significant difference between the aurochs of the N.W.
      European countries, but does reveal a significant difference between those
      from Denmark and Hungary.


the samples from Denmark and Britain and that the means of both samples
are almost identical for frontal breadth and astragulus length.
   The results are very different, however, when the size of the aurochs from
Hungary is compared with that of the northern aurochs. A statistical test on
astragulus length shows a very significant difference (measurements from
Bokonyi30), the Hungarian animals being the smaller and such a difference is
also apparent on the histogram (Fig. 5).
   The apparently smaller size of the Hungarian aurochs might be an example
of Bergman’s rule that mammals decrease in size with increasing southerly
latitude, although more research is needed before this can be definitely
established. It suggests a north-south cline of decreasing stature, so great care
must be taken when cattle remains from southern Europe, and more particu¬
larly from the Near East and Africa, are compared with those of north¬
western Europe.

      Ecological isolation


B. primigenius is generally considered to be a woodland animal (although the
wide spread of its horns would have prevented it from moving in dense
forest), but the possibility (although there is no evidence for it) that there
                                         Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle          285



             BOS PRIMIGENIUS. SKULL - Least frontal breadth.
    n
    5        Denmark
    4
    3
    2
    1

             Sweden
 4
    3
 2
1


4
             Britain
 3
2
1
                                                                       n
4
             NW Germany
3
2
X

                 170   180   190   200   210   220   230   240   250   260   270   280   290 mm




            BOS PRIMIGENIUS. PROXIMAL PHALANX - Proximal breadth.
8
7
            Denmark
6
5
4
3
2
1 ■


3 •
2       ■
            Britain
1 -


3 ■         Sweden
2 •
1       ■




                          33 34 35 36 37 3339 40 41 42 43 44 45 4647 48 49 50 51 52



            3 and 4 The size of post-glacial Bos primigenius in various parts of
            Northern Europe.
            The histograms suggest, and this can be statistically confirmed, that the
            aurochs of Denmark, Sweden, N. Germany, and Britain were of the same
            size.
               German measurements from Requate, H. (1957). Zur Naturgeschichte
            des Ures {Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827) nach Schadel- und Skelettfunden
            in Schleswig-Holstein. Z. Tierziicht. ZiichtBiol., 70, pp. 297-338.
286   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals          GRIGSON



        BOS PRIMIGENIUS. ASTRAGULUS - Maximum length.

 n
 5      Denmark
                                                   d>
 4
                                                   cf»
 3
                                $
 2
                            T       —LTL                 c? c?




 4      Sweden
 3
 2
 1
      m
        Britain
 4
 3
 2
 1




 4        NW Germany
 3
 2
 1


11
10
 9
 8        Hungary
 7
 6
 5
 4
 3
 2
 1
                                                                   n
            76 77 78 79 80 3182 83 84 85 8687 88 89 90 91 92 9394 95 96 97 98   mm


Fig 5 The size of Bos primigenius in Hungary.
      The histogram also shows that although the aurochs in different parts of
      Northern Europe were of the same size, it seems probable that the Hungarian
      aurochs was slightly smaller, at least in post-glacial times.
        German measurements from Requate, H. (1957)- ibid. Hungarian measure¬
      ments from Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn
      und das Problem der Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung., 14,
      pp.175-214-
                            Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle   287


were separate “woodland” and “plains” forms, as in the case of the American
bison should not be overlooked.

     Biological isolation


Since members of the various Bos, Bibos, Bison and Bubalus species can
actually hybridize, it is often considered that they should be classified as
varieties of the same species. It seems, however, very unlikely that such
hybridization ever happened without the interference of man. Herds of two
closely related Bibos species, the gaur and the banteng, came within one or
two miles of each other31 yet there are no recorded hybrids. It seems possible
that such biological isolation could have occurred between groups within the
same species; the aurochs must have been a herd animal and it is at least a
theoretical possibility that preference for mating within the herd might have
led to a reduction in gene flow and partial isolation.

     Domestication by man


Interference by man in the lives of animals can be of many sorts and of
varying degrees. Competition for land, forest clearance, agriculture and forest
fires would have interfered with, and restricted the natural habitats of animals.
Various forms of hunting, such as killing or maiming with missiles, trapping,
driving into caves or pens or over cliffs must have had some effect on the
natural animal populations.
   It is only a small step from certain methods of hunting to following, or
perhaps even controlling, the movements of cattle herds. Domestication
is usually recognized when an animal breeds under artificial conditions, and
it is at this point that real isolation from the wild form occurs32. However,
one cannot say how early on in the process of man’s interference with the
herds normal gene flow would have been reduced nor how early on this would
have had a recognizable morphological effect.
   In addition to the reduction in size which would follow the isolation of
animals, one would expect man to select for small size; to keep captive or
handle a massive bull with horns several feet long would be anything but
easy! If the wild and domestic forms were present in the same area, occasional
crossings could be expected, whether intentional or accidental. Apart from
the genetic effect of domestication there might be a phenotypic reduction in
size caused by the possible deficiencies of primitive stock-keeping.



      Conclusion

Only one of these various kinds of isolation is definitely known to have
reduced the size of the aurochs: domestication by man, and where the
288   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   grigson


presence of man can be assumed archaeologically this would be the most likely
explanation for the presence of cattie that are smaller than local aurochs. Any
such size change which was occurring naturally would have been a fairly
slow process and would have resulted in a normal distribution of measure¬
ments within that population. The size range of animal bones from a single
population, which had been preyed on by man and which are found in an
archaeological site, will obviously not exceed the normal size range within the
population as a whole. On sites where one finds a wide range of measure¬
ments from those of the aurochs downwards, one may suspect that domestica¬
tion was in progress; although it does not seem possible on this type of data
to distinguish between actual domestication and hybridization between
imported domestic cattle and the local wild population. In either case, how¬
ever, a wider than normal distribution of measurements occurs, and this may
help to distinguish a “domestic” factor from other possible natural causes
of small size in B. primigenius.



      The recognition of domestic cattle bones

When cattle bones are found on archaeological sites how can one decide, on a
metrical basis, whether they were those of wild or domestic animals ? Ideally
their measurements should be statistically compared to a large number of
measurements of animals known to be “wild aurochs”.
  When working with any aurochs sample it is important to remember the
wide sexual dimorphism of the aurochs so that the bones of cows are correctly
identified. Any comparisons made must be between contemporary samples, for
aurochs may differ in size in different periods (although such differences do
not seem to have occurred in post-glacial N.W. Europe). Samples must also
be from the same locality, for aurochs may have been of different sizes in
different places. At the present time measurements of B. primigenius are
usually too few to satisfy theses ample requisites and assumptions about the
wild and domestic status of bones from archaeological sites must remain
doubtful. However, it is to be hoped that with careful extrapolation of
existing data, and the eventual collection of much more data, domestication
in cattle will become easy to recognize metrically.



      Some examples of the use of the size ranges of Bos
      primigenius
      B urgaschisee- Siid


Histograms based on Stampfli’s33 Bos identifications at this Swiss Cortaillod
site reveal (see Fig. 6) three main size groups. Stampfli interprets them
                              Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle      289




                            SCHEME          A   (after Stampfli)

                      1      (la)       2               3          (3a)




Fig 6 The distinction between Bos primigenius and Bos taurus—1.
      The histograms show two alternative interpretations of the Bos measure¬
     ments from the Swiss Cortaillod site of Burgaschisee-Siid: either the Swiss
     aurochs was much smaller than that of Northern Europe or animals inter¬
     mediate in size between wild and domestic cattle were present. This demon¬
     strates the difficulty of the use of absolute size in identification when the size
     of the local aurochs is not known.
        Swiss measurements from Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P., and Stampfli, H. R.
     (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).
290   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals            GRIGSON


as (i) domestic cattle, (2) wild cows, and (3) wild bulls (see Scheme A, Table
3). If this interpretation is accepted, aurochs at this site are much smaller
than in Denmark (and north-western Europe), and this is confirmed by the
highly significant difference in astragulus length from Burgaschisee-Siid and
from the Danish mesolithic site of Svaerdborg (see Table 4).


                                                     Scheme B
                    Scheme A<0)                (possible alternative)

          1. Domestic                     1. Domestic

             (ia? Intermediate size)    \ 2. Intermediate (crosses or local
          2. Wild cows                  J    domestication ?)

          3. Wild bulls                   3. Wild cows

          (3a. Very large wild bulls)     4. Wild bulls


Table 3   Alternative schemes for the identification of Bos at Burgaschisee-
      Siid.
  (a) This scheme is implied by Stampfli in Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli,
      H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).



  There are, however, a few very large Bos bones (e.g. a horncore) at
Burgaschisee-Siid which suggest the possibility of a fourth size group (see
Scheme B, Table 3). Stampfli points out that the status of the animals in his
middle size group (ia? and 2) can only be clarified when the lower size
limit of wild cows is known, and this emphasizes the importance of com¬
parative local samples.


       Site               Measurement    No.      Mean       s          t     Probability t
                                                  mm.       mm.               outside limits

Svaerdborg           proximal            34       38-47    3-695]
                     breadth                                     f 6-774         <o-i%
Burgaschisee-Siid    prox phalanx        51       33-37    3-tSiJ

Table 4    A comparison of bone sizes of the “Bos primigenius” of Denmark
      (the mesolithic site of Svaerdborg) and Switzerland (the Cortaillod site
      of Burgaschisee-Siid).
      (Swiss measurements from Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P., and Stampfli, H. R.
      (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).)


      Bos primigenius in British Neolithic sites

Measurements of cattle bones from British neolithic sites plotted against
measurements of north-western European aurochs show that the FusselTs
Lodge34 Bos foot bones are of domestic size (Fig. 7), that wild catde were
hunted at Windmill Hill35, and suggests that the special large British neolithic
                                                        Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle                                                 291


    bones               domestic cattle                                                          Bos primigenius                                      no. of bones
      1-                                                                                                                                                    Danish
                                                                                                                                                              - 16


                                                                                                                                                                  14


                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                        Ik ml
                                                                                        .


                                                                                           Sii tSw mi                                                             10

                                                                                                   ■                        teHf s—
4
                                                                                               ■ IbI                        BUI                                   8
                                                                           mi               ■-
                                                                                                                                  I
3 ►-                                                                       w                                                   ' S III


2 --
                                                                       4     1          ilil            iii
                                                                                                                  mi■ iH
                                                                                                                            itKt ill
                                                                                                                                   lipj
                                                                                                                                                 I.
                                                                                                                                                                  6


                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                        III                                             ii 1
                             i                                      III iii                                ...    §i!ll I'll Hi                             -«    2

                                                                   m iji l 1
            t    t       t
                                  I
                                  t   t      t     t     t
                                                          '/y.-




                                                                  t      t    t     t            t
                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                       t         t    t
                                                                                                                       IU
                                                                                                                           t      t         t   t
                                                                                                                                                 Ill
                                                                                                                                                 an |a
                                                                                                                                                       t
            26   27     28    29      30     31    32   33        34     35   36    37           38   39         40   41   42    43     44      45     46   mm.

                                                                      Danish                          Windmill                  Fussell’s
                     Reference:            Star Carr
                                                                      Maglemosian                     Hill                      Lodge



    Fig 7 The distinction between Bos primigenius and Bos taurus—2.
          The histograms show that the footbones from the possible hide burial at
          Fussell’s Lodge long barrow belong to the domestic size group and not with
          the wild cattle (Grigson, C. (1966). The animal remains from Fussell’s Lodge
          long barrow, in Ashbee, P., The Fussell’s Lodge Long Barrow Excavations
          1957, Archaeologia C, 1966, pp. 62-73.)


    domestic ox (proximal breadth of proximal phalanx 35 mm.) claimed for
    Maiden Castle36 was probably wild37.

            Neolithic cattle in Schleswig-Holstein


    Nobis38 was of the opinion that some of the cattle from the TRB site of
    Fuchsberg-Siidensee were intermediate in size between wild and domestic
    cattle and therefore that local domestication was taking place. Histograms
    using the north-west European size ranges of B. primigenius confirm that there
    were animals of intermediate size in Fuchsberg-Siidensee and also in the two
    nearby TRB sites of Weissenfels39 and Bundso40. The wide range of variation
    suggests that domestic animals are somehow involved. However, considera¬
    tions of size alone are not enough to decide between the various possibilities;
    (1) that there was crossing between small domestic cattle (which might have
    been imported) and local wild aurochs, (2) that actual domestication was
    taking place, or (3) that both processes were in operation together.
                                      a tj- ~
                                  =3
 <L>
<- H
4-»
CO
c3                        c3 :
u
 d
 CD
t3
•S3
5                                 ^■1



rd
ffi




        4J                 O
        CJ
  CO    O
        s-i
                          c-i’d       on
  O     d
£       W
«H
        d
 o
 <D     8
  P
 •P
  co
        S-i
        O
        d
 "Hb
        S
 W      o
        *
 a
   o
 , IH   s
        d
        o
   4>   JO
   d    CO
  o     ,P
         o
 JO      o
  <U     H    <D d>
  d      P
  «     <     a‘a       o a s d
  c_>         o 8          &> fl -d
        13    Tj co
  u           c-. .22
 •d
   CO
        *G    o w
  <U    "•M
         3)             '•3 2
   sO    CO    d 73               20
         o
  Q     pH    m S

< C □
                        Absolute size differences of aurochs and cattle       293




Notes

 1 Bohlken, H. (1962). Probleme der Merkmalsbewertung am Saugetier-
    schadel, dargestellt am Beispiel des Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827, Morph,
   jfahrbuch, 103 (4), pp. 509-661.
 2 Kurten, B. (1955). Sex dimorphism and size trends in the cave bear, Acta
   Zool. Fennica, 90, p. 48; Simpson, G. G., Roe, A. and Lewontin, R. C.
    {i960).Quantitative Zoology. (2nd ed.). New York.
 3 Simpson, G. G., Roe, A. and Lewontin, R. C. (i960), op. cit. p. 114.
 4 Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Bur-
    gaschisee-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).
 5 Degerbpl, M. (1945). The bison in Denmark, Danmarks Geol. Unders.,
    2 73, pp. 1-62.
 6 Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). ibid.
 7 Riitimeyer, I. (1867). Versuch einer natiirlichen Geschichte des Rindes
    in seinen Beziehungen zu den Wiederkauern in allgemein, N. Denk.
    Allgem. Schweiz. Ges. ges. Naturwiss., 22 (2), pp. 1-176.
 8 Hitscher, K. (1888). Untersuchungen von Schadeln der Gattung Bos,
    unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung einigerin ostpreussischen Torfmooren
    gefunderer Rinderschadel, Diss.Kdnigsberg.
 9 Nehring, A. (1889). Uber Riesen und Zwerge des Bos primigenius,
    Sitzungsber. Ges. naturf. Freunde Berlin, pp. 5-7.
10 Adametz, L. (1898). Bos (brachyceros) Europaeus n. sp. (Resume), Bull,
    int. Acad. Sci. Cracowie, pp. 88-103.
11 La Baume, W. (1909). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der fossilen und sub-
    fossilen Boviden, Schrift. naturf. Ges. Danzig, 12, pp. 45-80.
12 Malsburg, K. von. (1911). Uber neue Formen des kleinen diluvialen
    Urrindes Bos (urus) minutus n. spec.. Bull. int. Acad. Sci. Cracowie, pp.
    340-8.
13 Hilzheimer, M. (1909). Wisent und Ur im Naturalkabinett zu Stuttgart,
   Jahresheft Vereins, vaterl. Naturk. Wurttemburg, 65, pp. 241-69.
14 Leithner, O. F. (1927). Der Ur, Ber. int. Ges. Erhaltung des Wisents, 2, pp.
    1-140.
15 Jackson, J. W. (1943). Animal bones—1 Neolithic, in Wheeler, R. E. M.
    Maiden Castle, Dorset. London, pp. 360-7.
16 Bilton, L. (1952). The History of the Chillingham Herd of Wild White
    Cattle. M.Sc. Thesis, University of Manchester.
17 Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954). Faunal remains, in Clark, J. G. D.
    Excavations at Star Carr. Cambridge, pp. 70-95.
18 e.g. Piggott, S. (1954). The Neolithic Cultures of the British Isles. Cambridge.
19 Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). The excavation of a Bos
    primigenius at Lowe’s Farm, Littleport, Proc. Camb. Ant. Soc., 54,
    pp. 3-16.
20 Jewell, P. A. (1962). Changes in size and type of cattle from prehistoric to
    medieval times in Britain, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 77, pp. 159-67.
21 Grigson, C. In preparation.
22 As defined by Kurten, B. (1955). ibid.
23 Grigson, C. In preparation.
24 Leithner, O. F. (1927). ibid.; Requate, H. (1957). Zur Naturgeschichte
    des Ures {Bos primigenius Bojanus 1827), nach Schadel-und Skelettfunden
    in Schleswig-Holstein, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 70, pp. 297-338.
25 Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954). ibid.; Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs,
    E. S. (1961). ibid.
26 Degerbol, M. (1962). Ur und Hausrind, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 76 (2-3),
    pp. 243-51.
294   Dart H Domestication and exploitation of animals       GRIGSON


      27 Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). ibid.
      28 Berry, R. J., this volume, pp. 207-17.
      29 Berry, R. J. ibid.
      30 Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn und das
         Problem der Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung. 14, pp.
         I75-2I4-
      31 Lydekker, R. (1898). Wild Oxen, Sheep, and Goats of all Lands. London,
         p. 46.
      32 See Berry, R. J. ibid, and Bokonyi, S., this volume, pp. 219-29.
      33 Boessneck, J., Jequier, J.-P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). ibid.
      34 Grigson, C. (1966). The animal remains from Fussell’s Lodge long
         barrow, in Ashbee, P. The Fussell’s Lodge Long Barrow Excavations
         1957, Archaeologia C 1966, pp. 63-73.
      35 Grigson, C. (1965). Faunal remains: measurements of bones, horncores,
         antlers and teeth, in Smith, I. F. Windmill Hill and Avebury: Excavations
         by AlexanderKeiller J925-59. Oxford, pp. 145-67.
      36 Jackson, J. W. (1943). ibid.
      37 Jewell, P. A. (1962). ibid.; Grigson, C. (In press). The domestic animals
         of the earliest neolithic in Britain, in Schwabedissen, H. Die Anfange des
         Neolithikums vom Orient bis Nordeuropa.
      38 Nobis, G. (1962). Die Tierreste prahistorischer Siedlungen aus dem
         Satrupholmer Moor (Schleswig-Holstein), Z. Tierzilcht. ZuchtBiol., 77,
         pp. 16-30.
      39 Nobis, G. (i954)- Zur Kenntnis der ur- und fruhgeschichtlichen Rinder
         Nord- und Mitteldeutschlands, Z. Tierzilcht. ZuchtBiol., 63, pp. 155-94.
      40 Degerbpl, M. (1939). Dyreknegler, in Mathiassen, T. Bunds0 en yngre
         Stenalders Boplads paa Als, Aarboger for Nordisk Old kundighed og
         Historie 1939, pp. 85-198; Grigson, C. (In press), ibid.
      SEBASTIAN PAYNE

      A metrical distinction between sheep and goat
      metacarpals

The osteological separation between sheep and goats presents considerable
difficulties: thus Reed1 writes, “The greatest obstacle to an analysis of the
origin and spread of prehistoric sheep and goats is my complete disbelief in
the validity of most of the published identifications.” In order to be fully
useful, a method for the separation of sheep and goat bones should satisfy
four conditions:

1 The relevant part of the skeleton should occur with reasonable frequency
  in archaeological contexts.
2 The relevant part of the skeleton should not, per se, be likely to present a
  biased figure for the relative proportions of the two animals: horn-cores,
  for example, are often used, but some of the sheep or goats, especially the
  females, may well be hornless, and the horn-cores of the animals differ so
  much (not only in shape, but also in structure and in size) that their
  resistance to destruction must surely also differ considerably: any figure
  thus obtained must therefore be treated with caution.
3 The separation obtained should be clear, demonstrable, and easily repro¬
  duced by different observers; ideally, therefore, the difference on which it
  is based should be capable of measurement.
4 The distinction should be able to be applied to immature as well as to adult
  bones.

   It is not however necessary that such a method should separate all sheep
from all goats. All that is needed is a way in which the sheep and goat bones
at any one site can be separated into two discrete groups, with a low propor¬
tion of intermediate specimens.
   In this paper a method is described which, it is hoped, goes some way
towards filling this need, using the ratio between two measurements on each
distal metacarpal condyle: this fragment occurs very frequently on most sites.




11— DOPAA   *   *
296   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals        PAYNE




      The method
Two measurements are taken on any distal metacarpal condyle (Fig. 1): the
medio-lateral width of the condyle (W. cond.), and the antero-posterior
width of its external trochlea (W. troch.). The first measurement cannot be
taken accurately unless one arm of the callipers is narrow enough to fit
between the two condyles, if both are present. Replicate measurements from


                                        1   \
                                    1       t
                                    /       1




                                                            W.tpoch,


               1. Lateral view
                                                w, troch.


                                                              w, cond




                                                 1
                                                 l




                                                             W, cond



             Fig 1 Distal metacarpal, showing the measurements.


 the same series of metacarpals taken by the same observer, and by different
 observers, have given results consistent to within 03 mm. These two measure¬
 ments are then plotted against each other for all the available distal meta¬
 carpal condyles. The medial condyle is normally larger than the lateral
 condyle, and the ratio W. cond. : W. troch. tends to be higher in the medial
 condyle: for this reason, different symbols are used for the medial condyles
                      A metrical distinction between sheep and goat metacarpals   297

    (triangles), and the lateral condyles (squares), whenever they can be dis¬
    tinguished. Similarly, fused and unfused condyles are differentiated in the
    plots.



             Excavated samples

    Results are presented for samples of metacarpals taken from five archae¬
    ological sites. In each case the same conventions are observed. In the first
    four plots (Figs. 2-5) two clusters can be seen. The samples are admittedly
    small, and the appearance of clustering may be exaggerated by the fact that a
    single animal may be represented by as many as four symbols. If, however,
    these clusters have any significance, and in at least one case (the sample from
    neolithic Nea Nikomedeia, Fig. 2), this seems a safe conclusion, a number of
    alternative explanations are available:

    (a) That they represent different age-groups of a single population. This
       seems unlikely, especially as both groups contain immature (unfused)
       individuals.
•   (b) That they represent different sex-groups of a single population. This
       seems unlikely, first because the relative positions of the groups are not
       similar in the four examples, and secondly because a small sample of
       modern sheep and goats of known sex showed no similar sexual dimorph¬
       ism.
    (c) That they represent two separate populations, either of the same, or of
       different species.

      The last seems to be the most reasonable explanation on the basis of the
    available data. As both sheep and goat seem to be present, using other
    accepted criteria, especially the shape of the horn-cores, and the skull sutures,
    the two clusters can probably be identified as sheep and goats. An obvious
    test is to examine a modern sample of sheep and goats, to see whether they
    show the same difference.



             A modern sample

    A sample of modern sheep and goats of known identity was collected by Mr.
    E. S. Higgs in 1963 inVerroia,a town in northern Greece near the site of Nea
    Nikomedeia, about fifty miles west of Thessaloniki. The plots for the meta¬
    carpals in this sample (Figs. 6-7) show a clear difference between sheep
    and goats: there is no clear separation into two discrete clusters, but there is
    no overlap between them either. This result confirms the earlier conclusion,
    that the two clusters in the excavated samples are to be identified as sheep and
    goats.
cTi        o.                                         CO   o       **•
      o.   o                                                         o.



                Fig 2 Metacarpal sample. Nea Nikomedeia, Greece. Neolithic.
E   E
        Fig 3 Metacarpal sample. Meare, England. Iron Age.
Fig 4 Metacarpal sample. Wandlebury, England. Iron Age.
                                                              o.
                            T

                                                    oj-a
                                                    V,   Oi




                                                    sSr^
                                                   ’T= -5?
                                                    o Jj;     o
                                                    ~s        <o
                                                   -S215
                                                    -Q C-


                                                    £s
                                                    4 a




                                                                   Fig 5 Metacarpal sample. Samaria, Crete. Recent.
          ◄


                  ◄


              ◄

                      ◄ ◄



          ◄
                                ◄
              ◄

                                    •<

                                         4




                                             o                o.
o    O                                       <r»              oo
CO   CM
                                                   WUTipOJVAft
Fig 6 Right metacarpals. Verroia, Greece. Modern sample.
Fig 7 Left metacarpals. Verroia, Greece. Modern sample.
Fig 8 Metacarpal sample. Denney Abbey, England. Mediaeval.
                A metrical distinction between sheep and goat metacarpals          305



      Conclusions

It is important to stress that it is not suggested that a diagnostic ratio, based on
these two measurements, can be used to identify every individual sheep/goat
distal metacarpal condyle. All that is claimed is that if this method is applied
to the sheep/goat metacarpals from a reasonably homogeneous archaeological
context, the sheep and the goats, if both are present, are likely to form two
distinct clusters, and can thus be identified. It is likely that, if a sample is large
enough, there will be some intermediate specimens; what is important is that
the bulk of material will fall into two distinct clusters. If only one species is
present, only one cluster is expected: in a sample from an English mediaeval
site (Fig. 8), a single cluster is observed: if a diagnostic ratio is used, on the
basis of the modern sample, to separate the sheep from the goats, it might be
concluded that a few of the bones are of goats (as is shown by the line drawn
in the figure), but it seems more reasonable to interpret the cluster as a single
population of sheep, and this is historically not improbable.
  This method is presented here, in an unfinished state, in the hope that it
can be put to the test on a wider range of material than has yet been available.
The author would be grateful to see the results of any attempt to apply it3.



      Notes
       1 in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960). Prehistoric investigations in
         Iraqi Kurdistan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilisation, Oriental Institute,
         Chicago, 31, pp. 1-184.
       2 The author wishes to thank Miss Fiona Gilmore for allowing him to
         examine material from Meare, and Mr. E. S. Higgs for providing material
         from Wandlebury, Denney Abbey and modern comparative material from
         Verroia. The work was done as part of the British Academy-Cambridge
         University Early History of Agriculture Project; the author especially
         wishes to thank its Director, Mr. E. S. Higgs, for help and encouragement.
      H. S. SMITH

      Animal domestication and animal cult in
      dynastic Egypt

 The writer is not a prehistorian, and has no specialist knowledge of animals,
 even from the purely antiquarian point of view. He was asked merely as a
general egyptologist to suggest the relevance of dynastic Egyptian evidence
to the problems of animal domestication in the ancient world. It follows that
 this short paper is highly eclectic, and that it has no claim to independent
worth, being based entirely on the work of others. It does not present more
than a small part of the evidence from Egypt which is important to this
 subject.
    Scientific study of the beginnings of animal domestication in the Nile
valley has not advanced far, though as the result of the Nubian campaign
some teams of prehistorians have begun to interest themselves specifically in
the subject. In general, however, largely owing to the lack of well-excavated
predynastic settlement sites in the alluvium, such anatomical material as we
have from earlier work may well be marginal to the main problems, and as
much of it was excavated forty years or more ago, identifications doubtless
leave much to be desired. Moreover the culture contexts in which these
specimens were found are not dated on an absolute time scale, and even their
relative dating may be disputed in some cases. As there is at present no means
of judging how far the desert edge sites from which these specimens come
represent the level of achievement in the valley, it seems best at present not to
propose on inadequate evidence an account of the early history of domestica¬
tion there, which may only mislead.
   Dynastic Egypt, however, throws a few side-lights on the state of domesti¬
cation and various forms of animal-keeping in a particular sophisticated urban
culture, that may be of some value for purposes of comparison. Scientific
study of the magnificent Egyptian portrayals of animals in sculpture, relief
and painting, is in the first place the work of two men, Schweinfurth and
Keimer, and this work has been principally devoted to identification of
species, often a delicate matter, rather than to the specific study of domestica¬
tion. The field is too vast for any summary here, and the author is incom¬
petent by training to make it. Animal domestication may have been as
308   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    smith


specialized in the ancient world as in the modern. In the third and second
millennia b.c. in Egypt, the bull preferred for sacrifice and for the table was
called iwz; exceedingly fat with pendulous belly, it stood relatively low on its
haunches, and had wide everted horns, which however were often deliberately
twisted asymmetrically or even removed during youth. Texts suggest that
these bulls were normally imported from the south, perhaps mainly from the
Dongola bend and adjacent territories. On arrival by river in Egypt, these
animals were kept tethered in stables or fenced paddocks under constant
surveillance; there they were fattened methodically for slaughter. The native
wild bull of the Delta marshes and the hill country bordering the valley, the
Egyptians called ng', it is depicted as lean and standing relatively high on its
haunches, with wide everted horns like those of the iwz, which are, however,
never deformed or removed. The ng was captured by lassooing, and once
tamed, appears to have been allowed to graze freely, being caught for service
by use of sticks and the lassoo. It was the draught animal par excellence used
for pulling the plough, stone blocks, funeral sarcophagi, etc. The Egyptians
bred from the females, and also naturally used them for milking, whereas in
the case of the iwz, females do not seem to be often represented and breeding
in Egypt was probably less common. The ng was in the natural course of
events also used for sacrifices and killed for meat (usually, one suspects,
animals that had done good service), but was never apparently deliberately
fattened. The cult animal of the bull-god Apis was a ng', probably this is true
also of other bull-gods, but is not demonstrable1.
  Perhaps the most remarkable case of over-specialization is that of a particu¬
lar race of fat-tailed sheep in which, Herodotus (III, 113) tells us, the tail
became so heavy that the sheep was unable to drag it about without serious
difficulty and consequent ulceration; so the shepherds supported the tail on a
wheeled trailer drawn by reins. This apparent fantasy has been shown to be
literal truth by Keimer, who has traced a series of references in Arabic and
European sources to these sheep from the mediaeval period to the last century,
and discovered that the trailer was still used in the Menufiyah province of the
Delta in recent times2. The fat-tailed woolly sheep, Ovis platyra, with horns
curved down and forward, was introduced in the Middle Kingdom, and lived
for a short time side by side with the ancient Egyptian fleeceless sheep, O
longipes, which, however, became extinct by the early New Kingdom.
O. longipes had laterally-twisted horns almost parallel to the ground, and it is
with these horns that the ram-headed deities Khnum and Amun and Herishef
are always shown. When in the later period incarnation animals were required,
these had to be culled from O. platyra, but the mummies of these animals
show that they were provided with a gilded wooden crown in the form of the
horizontally-twisted horns of O. longipes, so as to maintain the original
sacred appearance of the deity. In the particular case of the ram god of
Mendes in the Delta there is evidence to show that for a time a species of goat
                 Animal domestication and animal cult in dynastic Egypt    309

with horns similar in shape to O. longipes was used for incarnation animal^
but subsequently O. platyra was used here too3.
   That the third millennium was a time when the Egyptians were making
experiments with the surrounding fauna is shown by the scenes of feeding
tethered animals in fenced paddocks already referred to; for ibex, oryx,
antelope, addax, gazelle, and hyaena are shown being fed in the same paddock
with iwz bulls4. In the first three cases the motive is clearly fattening for
sacrifice, but the case of the hyaenas, who had to be forcibly fed (Fig. 1), is




Fig 1 The forcible feeding of a hyaena (Tomb of Kagemni at Saqqara (Dyn.
     VI)).


strange, for they do not normally seem to appear in offering scenes or lists5,
and there is no evidence that scavengers formed part of the Egyptian diet
except in time of famine, nor do they figure in cult. Another example is that
of cranes, who are shown in the bird-pens of nobles’ estates being forcibly
fed (Plate ii)6. Such scenes do not recur after the Old Kingdom. While the
keeping and forcible feeding of animals cannot of course be equated with
domestication for use, some of the same processes are involved. We should
310   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals      smith


perhaps then examine prehistoric material for signs of incipient or experi¬
mental utilization of species which never became fully domesticated. In this
connection reference should be made to the camel, which as is well-known
does not appear among the dynastic fauna of Egypt until the Roman period.
There are, however, indubitable representations of the camel from the
predynastic period, and one most remarkable theriomorphic vase in the
form of a camel from an allegedly intact tomb at Abusir el-Meleq, which
contains a (to me) disconcertingly wide range of material, but may date from
the First Dynasty7. None of this proves early use of the camel, but a terracotta
plaque bought by Schiaparelli from a Luxor dealer in 1904 and believed to
come from a predynastic cemetery north of Qurneh which was being looted
at that date, shows what is certainly a camel being led by one man and
ridden by a second. It is unfortunate that the credentials of this object are so
poor, for if genuine it might show that the camel was known and to some
extent used in the deserts bordering the Nile at an early period, but was not
introduced into the valley either because of its eating habits or lack of
human control until three millennia later8.
  The special form of animal keeping for which Egypt is famous, the lodge¬
ment of particular divinely selected animals in temples to act as the incarna¬
tion of a god, raises particular problems. In the case of the bull Apis, the
incarnation of Ptah, the animal was selected by means of special divine
markings, and on the death of its predecessor it was installed in a stall next
to the Ptah temple at Memphis with nation-wide pomp and rejoicing. The
bull was fed by the offerings of the King and the faithful, and was allowed to
lead a normal sexual life; in the latest period its cow-mother and its calves
were also sacred. On ceremonial occasions the animal, heavily garlanded and
adorned with insignia, was led out in procession, when prayers and requests
for oracles were made to him. On death he was embalmed and buried with
full royal honours at ceremonies attended by priestly representatives from all
Egypt, an occasion of national mourning. Actual burials so far discovered
date back only to the sixteenth century b.c., but what are almost certainly
representations of Apis bulls go back at least to the First Dynasty (c. 3000
B.c.)9. Other species probably attested as incarnation animals at this early date
are ibis, hawk, baboon and a member of the canids; the fact that other species
are not attested until later is not necessarily significant. But the existence of a
cult of an animal god does not even in late times predicate the existence of an
incarnation animal; in the case of savage species statues were always used for
cult purposes. Evidently the practical measures necessary to keep an animal in
good health in captivity for cult purposes are similar to those required for
domestication for use.
  In Table I are listed some important Egyptian genera, selected on
an arbitrary basis, with details of their utilization by the Egyptians for
sport, offering and sacrifice, domestication, as pets and as cult animals. This
table, of course, drastically over-simplifies the complexity of the phenomena,
                 Animal domestication and animal cult in dynastic Egypt     311

ignoring species, date, tabu and other important considerations. It does serve
to show, however, that the group of animals worshipped in Egypt has (i) no
direct relation with the group of domesticated animals; (ii) no direct relation
with the group of animals favoured for offerings and sacrifices in tomb or
temple cult. Most genera hunted by the king and the nobility in the Old
Kingdom for sport recur among those worshipped; it is notable that some
forms of such hunting and harpooning continued to be represented long after
they had passed out of practice, because they signified ritually the victory of
the king over his enemies, or in mythical terms of Horus over Seth
(Typhon)10. Many genera not in this group were of course worshipped.
Most of them were, however, wild, while those common domesticated fauna
of Egypt, the goat, the pig, the donkey and the duck were never associated
with cults.
  In view of this, it might seem that any connection between the keeping of
animals for cult purposes and domestication for use might be ruled out. Yet
I doubt whether the possibility can be dismissed so lightly. As seen above,
many of the fauna worshipped belong to the uplands or were the object of
hunting. The German school of historians of religion led by H. Kees has
made it probable, by careful study of individual cults and their mythology,
that behind even some of the cults which seem most closely connected with
domesticated animals and the agricultural fife of the valley, there stand pre¬
cursors belonging to an earlier stage of the economy. For instance, in dynastic
times the cult of Min of Coptos, who appears both as a white bull and as an
ithyphallic anthropomorphic deity, is concerned almost entirely with the
fertility of the crops and herds; yet certain titles and strands of myth appear
to show that originally Min in the form of a rampaging wild bull was lord of
the eastern desert. Likewise, there are indications that the anthropomorphic
female deities of the first cataract, Anukis and Satis, were originally a dorcas
gazelle and an oryx respectively. Certain bull and cow cults appear also to
have originally been addressed to wild species, and the object of one cult, the
baboon, Papio hamadryas, appears to have been extinct in Egypt by the third
millennium b.c. One important deity, Seth, the god of storm and desert, is
represented by a strange mythical animal, unknown among five and fossil
fauna, which yet may represent some of the traits of okapi or aardvark. It
seems possible that this representation may be a stylization of some creature or
a cross between creatures once known to predynastic Egyptians or a strain of
them, at a time when they lived in the deserts of North Africa, or indeed
elsewhere. Kees in fact sees the history of animal-cult in predynastic Egypt as
a gradual adaptation of cults which had originated among people hunting,
gathering, fowling, fishing and grazing over a wide area, to the changed
circumstances of intensive agricultural life in the valley dependent on the
Nile flood. This system of interpretation is far from proven, but there is a
considerable body of textual and iconographical evidence to support it, and it
is of course welcomed by the considerable body of religious historians who
312   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals               smith



                       Hunted
                         by                               Kept
                       Royalty      Kept     Offered     as pets               Object
                        and          for       or         or in    Domesti¬      of
       Genus           Nobility   fattening Sacrificed   gardens    cated       cults    Notes


Lion                      X          -          -           -          -             X
Baboon                    -          -          -           —          —             X     a
Monkey                    -          -                      X          —                   b
Oryx (antelope)           X          X          X           —                    *          c
Addax (antelope)          X          X          X           ~          —                    c
Buffalo                   X          X          X           —                               c
                          X          X          X                      —             >    c, d
Gazelle
Ibex                      X          -          -           —          —             —
Fallow Deer               X          -          -           —          —             -
Hyaena                    “          X          >
Wild Dogs (Wolf,
   Jackal)                -          -          —           —                        X     e
Fox                       -          -          -                      —             —     f
Domestic Dog              -          -          -           X          X             —
Cattle: iwz               -           X          X          -          X             X
Cattle: ng                X          -           X          -          X             X
Sheep                     -          -           -          -          X             X
Goat                      -          -           -          -          X             —     g
Pig                       -          -           -          -          X             -     h
Horse                     -          -           -          —          X             —
Donkey                    -          -           -          -          X             -     h
Cat                       -          -           -          X          X             X     i
Hare                      X          -           X          -          -             X
Mongoose                  -          -           -          -          -             X
Hippopotamus              X          -           -          -          -             X     j
Crocodile                  X         -           -          -          -             X     i
Fish (Lepidotus)           -         -           -          -          -             X     k
Fish (Oxyrhynchus)         -         -           -          -          -             X     k
Frog                       -         -           -          -          -             X
Vulture                    -         -           -          -          -             X
Falcon                     -         -           -          -           ?            X     l
Kite                       -          -          -          -          -             -     m
Crane                      -          X          -          -          -             -
 Stork                     -          -          -          X          -                    n
Heron                      -          -          -          -          -             X
 Ibis                      -          -          -          -          -             X      0
 Goose                     -          -          X          -          X             X      p
 Duck                      -          -          X          -          X         A"
 Ostrich                   X          -          -          -          -          -

general.    Phenomena are very much more complex than shown in this chart. In particular
the related factor of tabu is omitted, species are not distinguished, and date of introduction
and of first attestation of cult are left out of consideration.

  (a) No longer native in Egypt during dynastic period.
  (b) The baboon is shown adoring the sun at dawn, but had no cult of its own.
  (c) These animals were considered (at least from the New Kingdom) as “Typhonian”, and
      were in the context of royal rituals sacrificed as enemies.
  (d) No cult in dynastic times: some inferential evidence for predynastic cults.
  (e) Wepwawet of Siut, appears on early monuments erect and armed. Elsewhere the
      wolf/dog occurs prone on a shrine, typically as necropolis god and embalmer of
      Osiris (Anubis).
  (/) A human figure disguised as a fox appears playing the flute on a predynastic hunting
      palette: it is suggested that it may be a decoy.
  (g) No original goat cults: through similarity of the horns to Ovis longipes the goat was for a
      time after the extinction of this species substituted for it in the cult of the ram of
      Mendes.
                   Animal domestication and animal cult in dynastic Egypt                 313

believe that animal and plant cults belong to an earlier stage of religious
development than anthropomorphic cults11.
  If Kees is right, animal cults of some sort must have existed among the
inhabitants of north-east Africa before the main “neolithic revolution” and
before the intensive agricultural settlement of the Nile valley. It follows that
they were in being during the times in which animals were being domesti¬
cated for use. Of course there is nothing to show that at that early time special
incarnation animals were kept and fed; however, as the main point of animal
cult of this sort appears to be that the powerful numen to be propitiated or
appeased was felt to be manifest in the animal, the possibility that man
attempted from the first to approach the spirit through the living exemplar
cannot be ruled out. And if so the means he used would be very much those
used in the process of domestication.
  The most that can be said for the above tendentious argument is that it
points one more of the factors that could have played a part in the keeping or
domestication of particular species in a particular culture-context. For while
it is certainly right and necessary to regard the whole process of the domesti¬
cation of animals as an evolutionary event, that “event” is surely the sum of
many particular historical occurrences, which may well have been due to
individual combinations of cultural and environmental causes.



      Notes
       1 Montet, P. (1954). Les boeufs Egyptiens, Kemi, 13, pp. 42-58.
       2 Keimer, L. (1953-4). Notes diverses, Bull, de Vlnstitut d'Egypte, 36
         pp.466-76.
       3 Keimer, L. (1938). Remarques sur quelques representations de beliers,
         Annales du Service des Antiquites d’Egypte, 38, pp. 297-332; Zeuner,
         F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, p. 184 and Fig.


  (h) These animals were considered “Typhonian”, but were normally avoided even for
       sacrifices: eating them was tabued.
  (i) The early African cat may have been used for retrieving, but the evidence is difficult to
       interpret. This species died out after the Middle Kingdom: the domestic cat of the
       New Kingdom replaces some lionesses in cult, e.g. Bastet.
  (;') Considered “Typhonian”. Crocodile hunting not shown after the Old Kingdom.
       Hippopotamus-hunting scenes occur in the context of royal ritual to the latest period
       but can hardly have taken place after the Middle Kingdom.
  (k) Considered “Typhonian”. Generally fished for and eaten, but tabu in the context of
       certain festivals and certain local cults.
  (/) There is some evidence for falconry in ancient Egypt, see Keimer, L. (1950). Falconry
       in ancient Egypt, Isis, 41, p. 52.
  (ni) The sisters Isis and Nepthys as mourners for Osiris appear as kites, but there is no cult
       of the bird.
  (n) Kept in royal gardens as exotic specimens.
  (o) Is cult-incarnation of the same god, Thoth (the moon), as baboon.
  Cp) The goose plays a role in the myths of creation, and is identified with Amun, but the
       existence of a cult is dubious.

Table 1 Utilization of selected genera in dynastic period.
314   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals         smith


         7.17, corrects an error in his chapter (1954). Domestication of animals,
         in Singer, C. et al. (eds.) A History of Technology. Oxford, pp. 345-6 and
         Fig. 222.
       4 Zeuner, F. E. (1954). °P- cit. p. 341 and Fig. 220; see also von Bissing, K.
         (1905). Die Mastaba des Gem-ni-kai, 1, Berlin, pi. XI; see also Keimer, L.
         (1956). Notes de lecture, Bull, de Tlnstitut Francais d’Archeologie Orientale,
         55> PP- 13-20.
       5 The hyaena is found once in an Old Kingdom mortuary offering scene. A
         hyaena is seen in the hunting scenes of the Pyramid temple of Sahure being
         tackled by a dog, and they are occasionally seen led to and from the
         hunting field. A suggestion that they were used as decoys has no direct
         support.
       6 Duell, P. (1938). The Mastaba of Mereruka, 1. Chicago, pi. 52.
       7 Moller, G. and Scharff, A. (1926). Die Archaeologischen Ergebnisse des
          Vorgeschichtliches Graberfeldes von Abusir el-Meleq, 209. Berlin, pp. 40-1
         and pi. 24.
       8 Keimer, L. (1929). Bermerkungen und Lesefriichte zur altagyptischen
         Naturgeschichte, Kemi, 2, pp. 85-90.
       9 Otto, E. (1964). Beitrage zur Geschichte der Stierkulte in Aegypten.
         Hildesheim. An ivory from the Hierakonpolis deposit in the Petrie
         Collection, University College London, has recently been cleaned, and
         has proved to show a bull with a disk between the horns, probably Apis
         or Mnevis.
      10 Save-Sodebergh, T. (1953). Egyptian Representations of Hippopotamus
         Hunting as a Religious Motive. Uppsala.
      11 Kees, H. (1956). Der Gbtterglav.be im alten Agypten. Berlin. Especially the
         first chapter.
