Part IV: Studies of particular taxonomic groups
      Section i: Plants




      J. ALEXANDER & D. G. COURSEY

      The origins of yam cultivation


      Introduction

After the cereal grains, the staple food crops of most of the peoples of the
world are the so-called “root” crops, which include stems, rhizomes, corms,
bulbs, tubers and other types of organ as well as true roots. The origins and the
beginnings of the cultivation of these crops are generally obscure, although in
most cases, clear botanical evidence exists as to the continent of origin (e.g.
cassava or manioc is unquestionably of tropical American origin). The yams
present one of the most difficult and interesting cases for study.
  Yams are still important food crops, the annual world production being
estimated at twenty to twenty-five million tons1, and before the introduction
of American crop plants to the Old World, must have played a relatively more
important role than they do today. Ethnographic evidence from Africa and
Asia supports this, for the past importance of yams to many communities is
shown by the part they play in socio-religious events. A very wide range of
societies still have yam-based economies; some are comparatively primitive,
being until recently stone tool-using and organized in small isolated settlements;
others have developed high civilizations (amongst the highest in Africa) based
upon population densities of more than five hundred to the square mile.
  To the study of yam domestication three kinds of evidence, botanical,
ethnographic and archaeological, are relevant, but each kind is complicated
by special problems. The botanical by the presence of wild and cultivated
varieties through almost the whole of the humid and sub-humid tropics; the
ethnographic by the failure of observers to distinguish between yam species;
and the archaeological by the inability, at present, of field-workers to recover
direct evidence of yam cultivation2.
406   Part IV Plants    ALEXANDER AND COURSEY




      Botany
The yams, in the true sense of the word, are plants of the natural family
Dioscoreaceae, in the monocotyledonous order Liliales. By far the largest
genus of this family is Dioscorea itself, containing some six hundred species in
all, among which are numbered all the important species of edible yams. Two
other small genera, however, deserve passing mention: the tropical American
Rajania and the European Tamus, which contain the Carib Yam, R. cordata
and the Black Bryony, T. communis respectively. There are also a few other
minor genera (Avetra, Trichopus and Stenomeris), of no economic import¬
ance, in the Dioscoreaceae3.
  Before proceeding, it may be useful to clear up a misconception that exists
over the use of the word “yam”. Strictly, the word is applied only to members
of the genus Dioscorea and it is in that sense that it is used here. It is often
misapplied, however, especially by American writers, to include numerous
other tropical and sub-tropical root and tuber crops, principally the sweet
potato (Ipomoea batatas) but also to aroids such as cocoyams or taros
(Xanthosoma and Colocasia spp.) and arrowroots (Maranta spp.). The
“Elephant Yam” of India (Amorphophallus campamdatus) is also an aroid and
not a true yam. The so-called “yam belt” of the southern U.S.A. is actually a
region where sweet potatoes are extensively grown. In West Africa, a tuber¬
ous-rooted legume (Sphenostylis stenocarpa) is commonly referred to as the
“yam bean”, on account of the form of its root, as are also species of Pachy-
rhizus in Asia and Central America. The word “yam” is derived from the
West African Mande “niam” or Temne “enyame”, which was adopted as
“ynhame” in fifteenth-century Portuguese, or “name” in Spanish and spread
thence into other European languages4.
  Most species of Dioscorea and all those of importance as food crops develop
as underground tuber or group of tubers, from which an herbaceous “vine” is
produced annually, to die away at the end of the growing season. The yam
tubers are, organographically, derived from the stem. They are natural storage
organs, which enable the plant to survive during periods of inclement con¬
ditions—e.g. from one rainy season to the next—and it is these tubers that
form the edible part of the plant.
  In all Dioscorea which are normally used as food plants, the tuberous
system is renewed annually, the old tuber, in the natural state, withering
away as the vine develops during the growing season, to be replaced by a
new one formed towards the end of the phase of active growth. In some wild
species the underground system is perennial, and survives for the whole life
of the plant, becoming more or less lignified. Some of the Dioscorea, such as
those of the section Stenophora, are rhizomatous.
  The stem of the yam plant consists of a twining vine, adapted for climbing
among bushes, savannah trees or even forest trees. In the smaller species, it
                                              The origins of yam cultivation      407


may reach only two or three metres, but in the stronger-growing species, ten
metres is not unusual, and even more may be achieved. The male and female
flowers are borne separately, usually on different plants, and are incon¬
spicuous : they are, none the less, insect pollinated and not wind pollinated,
as has been suggested. The fruit, when formed, is a dry capsule, containing
seeds winged for dispersal by the wind. In many of the cultivated forms,
centuries of vegetative propagation has so reduced the sexual fertility of the
plant, that flowering is rare, and fertile seed is hardly ever, if at all, set.
  When grown as a crop plant, propagation is invariably by means of vegeta¬
tive “setts”, which consist of small tubers—in the case of those species which
produce many tubers; from bulbils, when these are formed; or, most usually,
from small pieces of large tubers.
  Stakes or ropes tied to trees are normally provided for the vines to twine
upon, to replace the support provided by the “bush” in the wild state. Such
staking is necessary in order to maximize yields.
  Representatives of the genus Dioscorea are to be found in most parts of the
tropics. A number of species also penetrate into the temperate parts of the
world, while a few are alpine in habitat. It is only among the tropical and
sub-tropical species, however, that yams of any value as food crops are
found. The natural distribution of the Dioscoreaceae in the world is shown in
Fig. 1.
  Within the tropics, species of Dioscorea are to be found almost wherever the
rainfall is sufficient for their growth—about 120 cm. annually—in both Old
and New Worlds, and in Australia. Various members of the genus are
adapted to rain forest and to savannah. A considerable proportion of the
members of the genus provide edible tubers, and some of these occur in most
parts of the non-arid tropics. Others provide poisons which are widely used
for hunting and fishing.
   The evolutionary history of the genus has been discussed fully by Burkill5.
It is sufficient for the purpose of this paper to note that the ancestors of the
Dioscorea, having evolved originally in what is now South-east Asia, appear to
have achieved world-wide distribution as early as the end of the Cretaceous
era. An alternative theory, based on cytological considerations, suggests an
evolutionary origin in Central Africa: this, however, is difficult to reconcile
with morphological taxonomy. Subsequently, evolution followed somewhat
varying paths in the Old and the New Worlds with the result that botanical
differences are marked between the species of the two hemispheres. Separa¬
tion of the Asiatic from the African ancestral forms appears to have taken
place later, during a period of desiccation in the Miocene era. There are there¬
fore closer relationships between the species of Asia and those of Africa, and a
single species occurs wild in both continents. This is D. bulbifera, of the
section Opsophyton, and there are appreciable differences between the two
 continental forms: the African form has been separated by some botanists as a
 different species.
Fig i The natural distribution of the Dioscoreaceae in the world.
     The full line encloses the tropical area in which the edible yams occur. Within the extensions
     enclosed by dashed lines, only atypical species, of no value as food crops, occur (e.g. Tamils, and
     sections such as Stenophora and Testudinaria).                  __
                                           The origins of yam cultivation        409


  Nearly all the Dioscorea of the Old World, except for a few aberrant species
which, not being food crops, do not enter the present discussions, have
chromosome numbers based on multiples of 10, and in a large number of
species, 2n — 40. The New World species which have been examined to date,
have all been found to have chromosome numbers based on 9. Some of the
cultivated species are high polyploids, with chromosome numbers ranging up
to in = 140. These high chromosome counts have been recorded principally
in those species which are most highly developed in cultivation, D. alata and
D. cayenensis (the latter species including D. rotundata, according to the
taxonomy followed by the author in question). A few cultivated forms appear
to have abnormal counts, based on multiples of 9, e.g. in = 36 or 45. It
has been suggested that such high polyploidy in cultivated forms is associated
with long periods of continuous vegetative propagation6.
  Of the many species of yam known, only comparatively few are of import¬
ance as crop plants. These fall naturally into three groups, according to their
geographical origins.


Asiatic Yams
The Greater Yam (also known as Water Yam
  or Winged Yam)                                  D. alata
The Lesser Yam (also known, incorrectly, as
  the Chinese Yam)                                D. esculenta
The Chinese Yams                                  D. opposita and D. japonica
                                                      (both often known by the
                                                      invalid taxon D. batatas)
The Aerial or Potato Yam                         D. bulbifera
Other Asiatic species utilized to some extent
  are:                                           D. hispida
                                                 D. pentaphylla
                                                 D. nummularia


African Yams
The White, or White Guinea, Yam                  D. rotundata
The Yellow, or Yellow Guinea, Yam                D. cayenensis
The Cluster or Bitter Yam                        D. dumetorum
The Aerial or Potato Yam                         D.     bulbifera     (the   African
                                                      form of this species has
                                                      been separated by some as
                                                      D. latifolia)
African species of minor use are:                D. preussii
                                                 D. praehensilis
                                                 D. sansibarensis
                                                 D. colocasiifolia
4io     Part IV Plants    ALEXANDER AND COURSEY


American Yams
The Cush-cush, Yampi or Mapuey                      D. trifida
Other American species, cultivated to some
  extent, and more in times before the intro¬
  duction of Asiatic and African species,
  include:                                          D. convolvidacea
                                                    Rajania cordata


  The most widely grown species are the Asiatic D. alata and the African
D. rotundata: these, together with D. cayenensis, D. nummularia, D. opposita
and D. japonica all belong to the section Enantiophyllum of the genus
Dioscorea. One of the characteristics of the yams of this section is the forma¬
tion of a single tuber—rarely two or three, and extremely seldom more—in
each season. The tubers often weigh as much as five to ten lei log rams each,
and in exceptional cases may weigh more than fifty kilograms, and be two to
three metres in length. These are the most typical yams: together, the six
species mentioned probably account for more than 90% of all the yams that
are actually grown for food, in the world. The minor African species, D.
praehensilis, D. preussii and D. colocasiifolia also belong to this section: all its
members have vines which twine to the right, whereas the other species of
yam mentioned twine to the left.
  The Asiatic D. hispida and the African D. dumetorum belong to the section
Lasiophyton, and form a cluster of medium-sized tubers, more or less fused
together. Their vines twine to the left, and bear compound leaves, usually
with three leaflets (most Dioscorea leaves are simple). These two species are
so similar that they have been classified as sub-species, but are now regarded
as distinct. Wild forms of both species are extremely toxic, owing to the
presence of alkaloids, but can be detoxicated by prolonged soaking in water.
 Many less toxic or non-toxic cultivars exist. To this section also belongs
 D. pentaphylla, which is generally similar.
      D. bulbifera (including D. latifolia). This yam, which belongs to the section
 Opsophyton, differs from most others in that it is the aerial bulbils, which are
 freely borne in the leaf axils, which provide the edible product: the under¬
 ground tuber is either small or absent. Many wild forms are toxic, though
 others produce bulbils so succulent that they can be eaten raw. Although
 widespread in cultivation throughout the tropics, it is nowhere a major food
 crop, to the same extent as some other species.
      The Lesser Yam, D. esculenta, is the only member of the section Combilium.
 Unlike the species discussed so far, it forms a large number of individually
 small tubers, each usually weighing only a few hundred grams: the under¬
 ground system of a newly-lifted plant superficially resembles that of the
 potato. The whole plant, although of climbing habit, is of smaller stature than
 the Enantiophyllum yams. It is seldom cultivated to such a large extent,
 although known and appreciated in most tropical countries.
                                           The origins of yam cultivation   411


  D. sansibarensis, of the section Macroura, hardly ranks as a cultivated plant,
although somewhat improved forms are known: it freely produces small
bulbils, as well as tubers which, in wild forms contain an alkaloid and are
highly toxic. It is a very large-growing species, believed, in many parts of
Africa, to possess magical properties.
  The indigenous American yams are today of minor economic importance,
having been largely displaced in cultivation by Asiatic and African species.
The most widely grown, D. trifida (section Macrogynodium) produces a
group of smaller tubers, rather after the manner of D. escidenta. The related
genus Rajania, which is restricted to tropical America, forms long, single
tubers, not dissimilar to those of the Enantiophylla.



      Ethnography

The ethnographic evidence for the use of yams may now be considered.
  Wild yams are harvested by hunter/gatherers and domesticated yams are
cultivated today in Africa, Asia and South America. No comparative study of
their social/religious customs and methods of cultivation seems to have been
published but the following generalizations can be made:
  In South-east Asia wild yams are known and prized by hunter /gatherers, in
Ceylon, the Andaman Islands, Malaya, the Pacific Islands and Australia. In
some areas slices of the tuber are even reburied for propagation. The toxins
are removed by pounding, shredding and soaking7 and are sometimes used in
fishing and hunting.
   Cultivated yams are grown from India to Fiji and from China to New
Guinea. They are major food crops in parts of Indonesia, New Guinea and
the islands of Oceania. The general technique after clearing and burning is to
fence a plot and then to plant tuber-fragments in mulched mounds. The work
is hard, continuous (both men and women taking part) and extremely skilful,
many species and cultivars being used to suit varying soils and climatic con¬
ditions. Digging sticks and hoes are the commonest tools used, but communi¬
ties are small and some were purely stone-using at the coming of Europeans8.
Cooking is usually by pounding or roasting. Religious ritual and belief are
often linked with the yam agricultural cycle and yams are much used in
ceremonies.
  Literary evidence shows yams to have been known in India in the sixth
century a.d. and in China in the second century a.d.
  In South America wild yams are eaten by hunter/gatherers in Eastern
Brazil and Venezuela. Shredding and soaking are employed to remove the
toxins9.
  Cultivated yams are widely grown as a secondary crop in Brazil and
Venezuela but nowhere are they a major crop10. After clearing and burning
the tuber-fragments are planted in low mulched mounds and regularly tended.
4i2   Part IV Plants     Alexander and coursey


They are interplanted with other crops and yields are low and communities
are small (o-6 per square mile). Only stone axes and hoes were in use prior
to European contact. Cooking processes include grating and soaking11. Yams
have no special religious connections, as far as is known, in America.
   In Africa wild yams are known and searched for by hunter/gatherers in the
rain-forests12. They are also used in time of famine by cultivators at the fringes
of the forest13 and in the savannah. The toxins are removed by soaking and are
sometimes used in hunting.
  Cultivated yams are grown from Guinea to Kenya and from Angola to
Uganda, but their importance varies greatly. Only in West Africa from the
Ivory Coast to the Cameroons are they at present a major food crop. There
have been suggestions that in Uganda and the Congo they were once much
more widely grown14.
 After clearing and burning, tuber-cuttings are planted in mounds or
ridges. These are mulched and the growing vines carried by living trees or by
poles. Population densities of up to 500 per square mile are supported15.
Hoes and rakes are the commonest tools used. Yams are usually interplanted
with other crops, great skill being shown in the choice of soils and species. The
apportioning of work between men and women varies greatly from region to
region16. Iron tools were commonly in use at the coming of Europeans but
some groups were still stone-using in the nineteenth century            A.D.,   and
memories of a stone-using period were preserved by others17. Cooking is
usually by pounding and mashing. Yams are used extensively in religious
ceremonies and some varieties are credited with magical properties. Events in
the yam agricultural cycle are widely celebrated18.



      Archaeology

It is apparent from this evidence that both wild and cultivated yams were
being utilized for food in most parts of the tropical world before historic
times and that only archaeology can solve the problems of their domestication.
The archaeological evidence is best considered separately in the three great
regions into which the botanical evidence divides (Fig. 2).

      Area I: South-east Asia


This region is the home of many species of cultivated yams. The principal
ones are D. alata, D. esculenta, D. nummularia, D. bulbifera, D. hispida and
D. pentaphylla, the first two named being the most widely grown. Many
other species are also cultivated but to a limited extent and in restricted areas.
The relative importance of the species vary greatly from one district to
another, although D. alata usually predominates, and throughout the area the
relative importance of yams to other crops also varies. Most peoples in the
Fig 2 The principal regions of yam cultivation.
414    Part IV Plants     Alexander and coursey


area have economies based in rice, and everywhere other “root” crops,
notably the aroids and sweet potato, compete extensively with the yams.


i S.E. Asian mainland.      D. alata. This species has never been found growing
wild, except in districts where it may have escaped from cultivation, but there
is nevertheless no doubt as to its Asiatic origin. The two wild species, D.
hamiltonii and D. persimilis, which are extremely close to it in botanical
characteristics are at home to the east and west of the broken country of the
upper reaches of the Irrawaddy, Salween, Mekong and Red Rivers (Fig. 3). It
seems likely that it was here that the selection or production of a plant derived
from the two wild species mentioned became D. alata. It is thus a true




Fig 3 The origins of Dioscorea alata.
      The areas marked h and p indicate the natural distributions of D. hamiltonii
      and D. persimilis, respectively. The cultigen D. alata is believed to have
      originated between the areas, near the point marked X'. A secondary centre
      of diversity of this species also exists at X, in Celebes (after Burkill, I. H.
      G924)- " list of oriental vernacular names of the genus Dioscorea, Gdns’ Bull.,
      Straits Settl 3 (4-6), pp. 121-244; and Burkill, I. H. (1951). The rise and
      decline of the Greater Yam in the service of man, Advmt. Sci., Bond., 7 (28),
      pp. 443-8-)                                                              ' V ;
                                             The origins of yam cultivation   415


cultigen, or product of cultivation. A more southerly origin, in the Malay
peninsula itself, is unlikely as it is an area with rainfall spread almost evenly
throughout the year and the wild yams of that area, having no severe dry
season to survive, do not possess large, esculent tubers like those of D.
hamiltonii and D. persimilis.
  D. esculenta has no closely related wild species, so its exact origin is some¬
what obscure. Botanically it is certainly Asiatic, although not Chinese in
origin, and it would appear likely that it was first taken into cultivation in the
same area as D. alata, while its subsequent spread also followed similar paths.
  Much closer to the wild forms are D. pentaphylla and D. hispida. D.
pentaphylla is a highly variable species as far as the quality of its tubers is
concerned: some are pleasant and harmless to eat, others nauseous and
highly toxic. It has been suggested that this wide variation may well have
provided a stimulus to selection by the more primitive cultivators, and this
species is currently at the early stages of ennoblement19.
  Most forms of D. hispida are highly toxic, owing to the presence of the
alkaloid, dioscorine, in the tubers, and are used as food only in times of
famine, after a lengthy processing to remove the alkaloid, involving alternate
soaking and drying of the shredded tubers. For this purpose, tubers are
collected mainly from wild plants, although it is possible that some ennoble¬
ment of the less toxic forms has taken place.
  The archaeological evidence from this area is still very scanty but a number
of relevant generalizations may be made.
  In Southern and Eastern Asia in the third and second millennia b.c., only
two distinctive complexes of cultural equipment have been recognized. Both
are first recognizable in the warm-temperate climatic zones; one in Central/
North China, the other in West Pakistan/North-west India; and both are
based on the cultivation of cereals. In the second millennium b.c. cultivated
wheat, millets and rice are present in both zones20. The ground stone tools and
pottery which are the commonest durable evidence in both complexes are
quite distinctive. In the region between them, that in which the domestica¬
tion of D. alata and D. esculenta probably took place, artifacts of both tra¬
ditions have been found and recent absolute dates indicate that some of them
belong to the late third and second millennia b.c.21 Excavation in Eastern
India has recently reinforced existing evidence of a movement of stone tool-
types, and probably pottery-types, westwards from the Chinese/Indo-Chinese
province at this time22. Whilst there is no indication of what, if anything,
these tool- and pot-makers were growing, the general nature of the equip¬
ment is that associated with agriculture elsewhere in India and China and
provides a context in which the domestication of local tubers might have
taken place. There is so far no earlier evidence from this entire region which
suggests agriculturalists of any kind.
  Further south in Malaya the present evidence from the second millennium
b.c. suggests connections with cultures further north in Indo-China23. There
416   Part IV Plants    Alexander and coursey


are no distinctive local cultures which might be associated with agriculture
nor is there any evidence suggesting any early or indigenous domestication of
yams. In this the archaeological evidence supports the botanical evidence24.


2 The Philippine, Malaysian and Indonesian islands.        Here D. alata and D.
esculenta exist in an enormous variety of cultivars and have longer and more
deeply buried tubers than the local varieties. The latter are sufficiently
numerous for a secondary centre of domestication in Celebes and the neigh¬
bouring islands to have been suggested25. The following deserve special
comment.
  D. nummularia is used as a food plant mainly in Indonesia and some of the
Pacific islands where it is of secondary importance. Nowhere does it seem to
be greatly ennobled, nor does it exist in any great variety of cultivars; although
it has considerable ritual significance in some areas26.
  D. pentaphylla is occasionally met with as a cultivated plant in many parts
of India, the Malay peninsula, the Philippines, Indonesia and Fiji. It is no¬
where an important crop plant and would appear to have been brought rather
fortuitously into cultivation at a number of widely separated places.
  D. bulbifera. The practices adopted for the cultivation of this species are
radically different from those used for other yams. The edible portion of the
plant is the aerial bulbil, which may be “harvested” from the vines of the
growing plant, after the manner of a fruit. Such an easily available food must
have attracted the attention of man at a very early date, and as might be
expected, the use of this plant as food occurs in many districts. As there are
no very great numbers of cultivars concentrated in any one part of Asia or
Africa, it is not unreasonable to assume that this species was brought into
cultivation in many places, independently.
  The archaeological evidence from this region shows stone and pottery
artefacts of the two mainland cultural traditions; the Chinese/Indo-Chinese
type being widespread through the coastal islands and the Indian/Pakistani
type through Indonesia27. There is at present no evidence to suggest an
independent development of agriculture earlier than the mainland28. This
appears to support the botanical evidence that the original domestication of
the main yam cultivars should not be looked for here.


3 Central and North China, most of Japan, the Ryukyu Islands and parts of
Korea. This is not today a very important yam-growing region, but deserves
mention as substantial quantities of the two very closely related species D.
opposita and D. japonica are grown here. Only a small number of cultivars are
known and they are not cultivated to a significant extent anywhere else in the
world. They are to be regarded as warm-temperate, rather than as tropical,
crops, in spite of their close botanical relationship to many of the major
tropical food yams. They are members of the section Enantiophyllum, and so
normally produce only a single, large tuber, which in most forms drives deeply
                                            The origins of yam cultivation   417


into the soil, making harvesting a laborious process. They are well adapted to
the area in which they grow, and where, without doubt they originated. They
have not, within the historical period at least, been crops of major importance.
In modern times they have been taken in cultivation to the Hawaiian Islands,
America and even, during the time of the mid-nineteenth century potato
famines, to Europe: in none of these areas, however, have these yams ever
become much more than horticultural curiosities.
  There is at present no archaeological evidence to suggest when they were
brought into cultivation. Literary evidence attributes their cultivation in
China to the mythical period before c. 1500 B.c.


4 The Pacific Islands east of Indonesia and Australasia.   In this region yams
of S.E. Asian types (notably D. alata, D. pentaphylla, D. bulbifera and D.
nummularia) were widespread at the time of the first European contacts. They
are not indigenous to the islands and botanical, ethnographic and archae¬
ological evidence all support a movement of people and cultivated plants
eastwards in the first and second millennia a.d.29 There is therefore no reason
to consider this region further, in connection with agricultural origins.


5 The westward spread of S.E. Asian yam cultivars.     Some cultivars (notably
D. alata and D. esculenta) are found in India, Ceylon, Madagascar, the coast
of East Africa, Central and West Africa, the Caribbean islands and in Central
and South America. Since Madagascar, Africa and South America have
indigenous wild and cultivated yams of their own, the problems of the
origins of cultivation are different from those of the eastern spread and
primarily relevant to the problems of local cultivars there. They may be
considered in three regions:

      (a) The coastlands of the Indian Ocean.   Elere the only certain evidence
      is literary, and it is established that cultivated yams were known in
      India by 600 A.d. (probably earlier) and in Madagascar well before
      1450 a.d.30 There seems no doubt that the references are primarily to
      D. alata.
        The archaeological evidence for this spread is twofold: firstly from
      the third millennium b.c. onwards there is considerable evidence for
      long distance trade between the highly sophisticated societies of W.
      Pakistan, N.W. India, the Persian Gulf and Arabia, but it is only in the
      first millennium b.c. that Ceylon, Indonesia and the S.E. Asian main¬
      land can be shown to take part in it. An earlier participation by Malays
      and Indonesians seems unlikely on present evidence for no highly
      developed societies of the kind likely to be interested in trans-Indian
      Ocean trade have been recognized at this period. Secondly from 300 b.c.
      onwards historical evidence makes such contacts more likely and from
      c. 150 b.c. onwards direct sailing across the ocean is well attested.
418   Part IV Plants    ALEXANDER AND COURSEY


      There is considerable archaeological evidence that the manufactures of
      the Chinese and Roman Empires were being exchanged by this route in
      the first two centuries a.d.31 Since yams were used from at least this time
      onwards by Malay sailors, this trade provides a context for the arrival of
      yams, and perhaps bananas (another S.E. Asian food favoured by
      sailors), on the east coast of Africa. These voyages would have been
      contemporary with the great Pacific voyages to the east32.
        On quite different evidence, linguistic and racial, a date between 300
      b.c. and 400 a.d. is generally accepted for the settlement of Madagascar
      by Malaysian people. These might well have brought D. alata to the
      island.

      (b) The spread into Central and West Africa.     When records began to
      distinguish the yam species growing here (in the last century) D.
      alata, alone of the S.E. Asian cultivars, was to be found in a few areas of
      the Congo Basin and in the “yam zone” of West Africa, and in many
      areas was distinguished linguistically from “proper yams” i.e. the local
      species33. Two other S.E. Asian cultivated plants, bananas and Colocasia
      were found in the same regions34.
        There seem to be two possible explanations for this: D. alata may
      have spread by land from the Kenya-Tanzanian coast at some time
      after 400 b.c.; or it may have been carried by sea round the Cape of
      Good Hope. If the latter, then it is likely to have arrived after 1498,
      when Portuguese are known to have been using it for sea-stores, rather
      than have been carried by Malay/Madagascans for whom there is no
      evidence of sailing in the Atlantic. If the former, then the African
      archaeological evidence for the early first millennium a.d. is important.
      Whilst there is general evidence of long distance trade eastwards from
      Katanga and Rhodesia in this miUennium35, and of folk movements out
      of the Congo Basin to the east and south, there is no evidence of any
      trade or movements into West Africa, especially across the Cameroon
      Mountains, which to this day form a major ethnic boundary. Indeed
      such evidence as there is suggests rather a southward movement from
      that region31'. If D. alata reached West Africa at this time there is no
      archaeological context at present in which to place it; it must also have
      been adopted very readily and local wild forms quickly brought into
      cultivation.


      (c) South America and the Caribbean islands.        Cultivars of South¬
      east Asian species (D. alata and D. esculenta) reached this region, to¬
      gether with some African ones, in and after the sixteenth century a.d.
      There is literary evidence that they were deliberately imported by
      Spaniards and Portuguese.
                                              The origins of yam cultivation    419




      Area II: West and Central Africa


This area is the home of a large group of cultivars of which D. rotundata and
D. cayenensis are principal37, and D. dumetorum, D. praehensilis, D. colocasiifolia
and D. preussii lesser, varieties.
  The limits of the main zone, growing 90% of all the yams in Africa, are
remarkably sharp (Fig. 4). The northern and southern are climatic, represen-




Fig 4 The West African yam zone.
      The full line encloses the area where yams are, traditionally, the staple food
      crop (after Miege, J. (1954). Les cultures vivrieres en Afrique occidentale,
      Cah. d’Outre-Mer, 7 (25), pp. 25-50; Coursey, D. G. (1965). The role of yams
      in West African food economies, Wld Crops, 17 (2), pp. 74-82; and Coursey,
      D. G. (1967). Yams. London, pp. 28-67.)


ting the boundary of minimum rainfall in the north, and the coastal swamps
and lagoons in the south. The western boundary coincides closely with the
Bandama River of the central Cote d’Ivoire, and the eastern to the Cameroon
Mountain chain38.
 In the remainder of Central and West Africa, yams are only cultivated to a
very limited degree, and they are only major crops in very restricted localities.
The same species are grown as in the main zone, but D. rotundata is less
important and the minor African yams more so.
  D. rotundata and D. cayenensis are best considered together, as they are
extremely close botanically, and the techniques of cultivation are virtually
identical. Most of the French botanists who have worked with the genus
420   Part IV Plants     Alexander and coursey

Dioscorea regard the former as being merely a subspecies of the latter39: the
term D. cayenensis in most French writing therefore includes yams that
British authors would refer to as D. rotundata. A detailed discussion of the
taxonomy would be out of place here, but it may be noted that D. cayenensis
sensu strictu is a forest species, adapted to a short dry season, and a correspond¬
ingly brief period of dormancy: the forms that may be referred to as D.
rotundata have a longer dormant period, adapted to the longer, fiercer dry
season of the savannah: they therefore tend to build up larger reserves in their
tubers, and are thus better suited for use as crop plants (an incidental advan¬
tage is that the tubers become more deeply dormant and therefore store
better). However, there are many intermediate forms, which have been fixed
as apomictic clones, by continuous vegetative propagation in cultivation,
which may represent hybrids, or merely variations within the species. Yams
essentially identical in their botanical characteristics with cultivated D.
cayenensis are known in the wild state through most of the forest zone of West
Africa. Like D. alata, D. rotundata is unknown in the wild state, and is
apparently a cultigen. It is possible that such wild species as D. abyssinica
and D. praehensilis may have played a part in its formation. D. rotundata is by
far the most important, and widely cultivated, species in West Africa.
   D. bulbifera. This species, which occurs wild throughout most of tropical
Africa, is cultivated to a limited extent in many areas. Its use doubtless arose
in much the same way as it did in Asia and Oceania, independently in many
districts. The African forms of the species (sometimes separated as D.
latifolia) are generally inferior to Asiatic ones, and appear to be even less
ennobled than the latter. The Asiatic forms are recognized by some African
peoples as having been introduced by Europeans.
   D. dumetorum. The wild and toxic species is so similar to the Asiatic D.
hispida that it was formerly regarded as a sub-species: it is now known to be
distinct. In parts of West Africa it has been ennobled in cultivation to a
considerable degree, and virtually non-toxic forms are quite extensively
grown, especially in the former Eastern Provinces of Nigeria. The process of
acculturalization of this species is still continuing: in 1901 Chevalier observed
plants of this species being collected from the wild state in Ubangui-Shari,
and those which were not immediately required for food being planted
around village compounds.
   Like D. esculenta the properties of the starch of this yam render it un¬
suitable for the making of the traditional West African dish, “fufu”: it is,
nevertheless much appreciated for other culinary uses.
   It is only in recent years that botanical research has shown this complex of
cultivars to be certainly African and in so doing has made much of the
previous theorizing invalid40.
   The ethnographic and archaeological evidence complement each other
particularly well in this region, for the ethnography shows that at the coming
of the Europeans there was no evidence of staple food crops other than yams
                                             The origins of yam cultivation    421

in the “yam zone” of West Africa. It is likely therefore that agriculture began
here only after local yams had been ennobled or foreign ones introduced. The
archaeological evidence is interpreted below as suggesting the former:
  In the savannahs immediately south of the Sahara, cereal-based agriculture
is attested in the third millennium b.c. and in the eastern and southern
savannahs early in the first millennium A.D. (but might have been there well
before this)41. This may mean that “domestication” as a concept was available
to forest dwellers in West Africa as early as the third millennium b.c. This is
supported by finds of savannah-type artifacts far south into the forest
margins at that period42.
  In the third and second millennia b.c. therefore, the contemporary situa¬
tions in West Africa and in the interior of S.E. Asia have more parallels than
was previously suspected. In both there was the possibility of contact with
well established cereal growing communities and there were hunter/gatherers
who in all probability then as now, knew and prized wild tubers, including
yams, which were suitable for cultivation43.
  A similar parallelism may be noted in the archaeological evidence, for on
the forest margins in Ghana and Nigeria as in S.E. Asia, complexes of ground
stone tools and pottery related to cereal agriculturalists’ types, are found in the
second and first millennia b.c.44 Whilst these cannot yet be associated directly
with agriculture, similar artifacts in the African savannahs certainly were in
the previous millennium. It may be, as Davies suggests45, that yams were
already being cultivated in Africa.
   If this were so then the later events in the area fall into place. At the coming
of the Europeans in the fifteenth century a.d. dense populations organized
into urbanized societies existed in southern Nigeria and around the mouth
of the Congo. The traditions of these societies stretch back to twelfth century
a.d. apparently based upon the yam cultivation46 which is still, as it was in the
seventeenth century, so interwoven with their religious and social life. The
complexity of the cultivation and the variety of cultivars of the indigenous
species might well mean that three millennia of development, rather than the
single one since the earliest possible introduction of D. alata, are represented.
That other urbanized societies developed in West Africa during and possibly
before the first millennium a.d. is well documented in ancient Ghana.
  It would seem that a good case exists for regarding the domestication of
yams in West Africa as being contemporary with and quite separate from that
in South-east Asia.

     Area III: South America and the Caribbean islands


The yams most cultivated in America today are Asiatic and African intro¬
ductions of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; D. alata, D. cayenensis,
D. rotundata, D. esculenta and D. bulbifera are all grown, especially in the
West Indies. The first named is generally the most popular, but in Jamaica
422   Part IV Plants   ALEXANDER AND COURSEY


and elsewhere in the Western Caribbean the African species are more
favoured.
  Although there are more species of Dioscorea indigenous to the New World
than to the Old, man in the Western Hemisphere has paid little attention to
them as potential crop plants, probably because of the availability of more
easily cultivated “root” crops such as manioc or cassava (Manihot esculenta),
tanias (Xanthosoma spp.), sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) and in the cooler
areas, Solatium spp. The one species that was fairly widely cultivated and to
some extent ennobled was D. trifida. This species appears to have a centre o
origin on the borders of Guyana and Brazil, where many forms are known,
and to have spread in cultivation through Trinidad northward along the
island chain, becoming progressively more highly selected, until in Jamaica
only one or two forms are known47. This pattern of distribution suggests an
original domestication and dispersal by the Arawak, but no very definite
information appears to be available.
  In one of the two surviving Carib communities, in Dominica, species of
Rajania (a small genus of the Dioscoreaceae, whose members are of similar
anatomy to the yams) are still grown to a limited extent. It is not highly
ennobled, and although common in the wild state, is not now cultivated else¬
where in the Caribbean48.
  A form of “protoculture” of D. convolvulacea, which is encouraged in
orchards and cocoa plantations, using the trees as supports, has been men¬
tioned in Costa Rica49.
  American yams have not been taken in cultivation to the Old World to any
significant extent, in marked contrast to the westward movement of both
Asiatic and African cultivars. There is at present no indication of how long
these have been in cultivation or whether the “Aje” referred to by Columbus
was D. trifida, another indigenous Dioscorea, or possibly some other crop50.
  It is certain, however, that root crops, in particular Manihot esculenta were
widely cultivated in pre-Hispamc times and that yams, which today play a
subsidiary role within that agricultural system, may well have played it then,
rhis is made more likely by the knowledge and use made of wild tubers,
including yams, by local hunter/gatherers. Since suggestions that roo.
cultivation might have been practised in the third millennium b.C. in this
region01 yams, as a minor crop, may well have a respectable antiquity here
and domestication may have been generally contemporary with that in the
other two areas. The parallelism between this and the African and Asian
regions also includes contiguity with an area which, by the third miUennium
B.C-, already had established an agricultural pattern (in this case Meso-
American), and the presence of hunter/gatherers appreciative of wild tubers
including yams.
  It may be therefore that there was an independent centre of yam domestica¬
tion in the New World not far removed in time from those of the Old World.
                                             The origins of yam cultivation    423




      Conclusions

On the basis of the evidence presently available, there is no reason to suppose
that the introduction of yams into cultivation occurred initially only in a single
area. Instead, the prerequisites of domestication are clearly seen to have
existed in three widely separated regions—South-east Asia; West Africa and
tropical America—and different species of yam were actually brought into
cultivation, and subsequentiy ennobled, in the three areas. Subsequent
movement of the cultivated forms has taken place, in historic times, the
Asian species being taken in cultivation to both Africa and America, and the
African species to America: this has tended to obscure the original pattern.
  The conditions which favoured the domestication appear to have been, in
all three regions, cultural interaction between people possessed of primitive
grain-based agricultural systems with others, still in the hunter/gatherer stage,
who were utilizing wild yams. These contacts seem to have occurred approxi¬
mately simultaneously, in all three regions, during the third millennium b.c.52



      Notes
      1 Coursey, D. G. (1965). The role of yams in West African food economies,
         Wld. Crops, 17 (2), pp. 74-82.
      2 Alexander, J. (In press). The domestication of yams, in Brothwell, D. R.
        and Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science and Archaeology. 2nd ed. London.
      3 Coursey, D. G. (1967). Yams. London, pp. 28-67.
      4 Burkill, I. H. (1938). The contact of the Portuguese with African food
        plants which gave words such as “Yam” to European languages, Proc.
        Linn. Soc., 150 (2), pp. 84-95; Corominas, J. (1954-7). Diccionario Critico
        Etimologico de la Langua Castellana. Madrid; Coursey, D. G. (1967).
        op. cit. pp. 5-27.
      5 Burkill, I. H. (i960). The Organography and the Evolution of the
        Dioscoreaceae, J. Linn. Soc. (Bot.), 56 (367), pp. 319-412.
      6 Sharma, A. K. and De, D. N. (1956). Polyploidy in Dioscorea, Genetica,
        28 (1-2), pp. 112-20; Martin, F. W. and Ortiz, S. (1963). Chromosome
        Numbers and Behaviour in some Species of Dioscorea, Cytologia, 28 (1),
        pp. 96-101; Martin, F. W. and Ortiz, S. (1966). New Chromosome
        Numbers in some Dioscorea Species, Cytologia, 31 (1), pp. 105-7.
      7 Forde, C. D. (1964). Habitat, Economy and. Society. London.
      8 Barrau, J. (1956). Les ignames alimentaires des lies du Pacifique sud,
        J. Agric. trop. Bot. appl, 3 (7-8), pp. 385-401; Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      9 Sauer, C. O. (1952). Agricultural origins and dispersals, Amer. Geog.
        Soc., Bowman Memorial Lectures, Series 2.
     10 Stewart, L. and Farron, M. (1959)- The Native Peoples of South America.
        New York.
     11 Metraux, A. (1948). in Steward, J. H. (ed.) Handbook of South American
        Indians, III. Bureau of American Ethnology, 143; Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
     12 Burkill, I. H. (1939). Notes on the genus Dioscorea in the Belgian Congo,
        Bull. Jard. bot. Etat., Brux., 15 (4), pp. 345~92-
     13 Okiy, G. E. O. (i960). Indigenous Nigerian food plants, J. W. Afr. Set.
         Sci.Assoc., 6 (2), pp. 117-21; Corkill, N. L. (1948). The poisonous wild
           *   *
15—DOPAA
424   Part IV Plants      Alexander and coursey


         cluster yam, Dioscorea dumetorum Pax., as a famine food in the Anglo-
         Egyptian Sudan, Ann. trop. Med. Parasit., 42 (3-4), pp. 278-87.
      14 McMaster, D. (i960). A subsistence crop geography of Uganda, Ph.D.
          Thesis, Univ. of London', Burkhill, I. H. (1939)- ibid.
      15 Gourou, P. (1966). The Tropical World. 4th ed. London.
      16 Irvine, F. R. (1963). A Textbook of West African Agriculture. London:
         Torto, J. O. (1956). The cultivation of yams in the Gold Coast, New Gold
         Cst. Fmr., 1 (1), pp. 6-8.
      17 Clark, J. D. (1963). Africa south of the Sahara, in Braidwood, R. J. and
         Willey, G. R. (eds.) Courses toward Urban Life. Edinburgh.
      18 Coursey, D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 197-203. A more detailed study of this
         subject is currently under preparation.
      19 Burkill, I. H. (1924). A list of oriental vernacular names of the genus
         Dioscorea, Gdns’ Bull., Straits Settl., 3 (4-6). pp. 121-244; Burkill, I. H.
         (1951). The rise and decline of the Greater Yam in the service of man,
         Advmt. sci., Lond., 7 (28), pp. 443-8.
      20 Watson, W., this volume, pp. 397-402; Allchin, F. R., this volume,
         PP-323-9-
      21 Sharma, T. (1966). Neolithic cultures of Assam, Ph.D. Thesis, Univ. of
         London; Sieveking, G. (1954-5). Excavations at Gua Cha Kalantan,
         Fed. Mus.J. {Malaya). 1-2, p. 75; Clark, J. D. (1964). World Prehistory.
         Cambridge; Solheim, W. G. (1968). Early Bronze in North-eastern
         Thailand, Current Anthropology, 9 (1), pp. 59-62.
      22 Sharma, T. (1966). ibid. See especially under Daojali Hading.
      23 Tweedle, M. (1953). The stone age in Malaya,^ R. Asiat. Soc., 26 (2).
      24 Sauer’s theory should, therefore, be abandoned.
      25 Burkill, I. H. (1924). ibid.; Burkill, I. H. (1951). ibid.
      26 Barrau, J. (1965). Histoire et prehistoire horticole de l’Oceanie tropicale,
         J. Soc. Oceanistes, 21 (21), pp. 55-78.
      27 van Heekeren, J. (1957). F/ze Stone Age in Indonesia. The Hague.
      28 With the possible exception of Taiwan (see Solheim, W. G. (1968). ibid.).
         The evidence is, however, too uncertain to be acceptable at present.
      29 Barrau, J. (1965). ibid.
      30 Burkill, I. H. (1924). ibid.; Burkill, I. H. (1951). ibid.; Wrigley, C. (i960).
          Speculations on the economic prehistory of Africa, J. Afr. Hist., 1 (2),
         pp. 189-203; Jumelle, H. and Perrier de la Bathie, H. (1910). Fragments
         biologiques de la flore de Madagascar, Ann. Mus. colon., Marseilles (2'
          Ser.), 8, pp. 1-96; Jumelle, H. (1922). Ignames sauvages et ignames
         cultivees a Madagascar, Rev. Bot. appl. Agric. trop., 2 (9), pp. 193-7.
      31 Wheeler, R. E. M. (1958). Rome beyond the Imperial frontiers. London.
      32 Barrau, J. (1963). Plants and migrations of Pacific peoples. 10th Pacific
          Science Congress. Hawaii.
      33 The other important Asiatic species, D. esculenta, was introduced only
         within the Colonial period in Africa. The Asiatic form of D. bulbifera is
         recognized by some African people, e.g. the Floup of Portuguese Guinea,
         as having been “brought by white men”; see Coursey, D. G. and Alex¬
         ander, J. (1968). African agricultural patterns and the sickle cell, Science,
          160 (3835), pp. 1474-5.
      34 Simmonds, N. W. (1962). The Evolution of the Banana. London; The
         other crop, Colocasia, may, as suggested by Burkill, I. H. (1938). ibid.,
         have come down the Nile valley, but there is no archaeological evidence
         which makes such a move likely. There is also no reliable evidence that
         Malay navigators ever penetrated into the Atlantic.
      35 Fagan, B. (1966). Southern Africa. London. (See especially Ingombe
          Ilede); Poznanski, M. (1961). Pottery types from archaeological sites in
         East Africa, J. Afr. Hist., 2 (2), pp. 177-98; Fagan, B. (1966). The Iron
         Age of Zambia, Current Anthropology, 7 (4), pp. 453-62.
                                        The origins of yam cultivation    425


36 Stevenson, W. Unpublished information.
37 Torto, J. O. (1956). This author suggests that about 80% of the yams
   grown in Ghana at that time were derived from two cultivars of D.
   rotundata; Coursey, D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 134-44. The figure given
   by Torto for Ghana is probably at least approximately correct for the
   West African yam zone as a whole; Chevalier, A. (1936). Contribution a
   l’etude de quelques especes africaines du genre Dioscorea, Bull. Mus. Nat.
   Hist. Nat., Paris (2e ser.), 8 (6), pp. 520-51.
38 Miege, J. (1954). Les cultures vivrieres en Afrique occidentale, Cah.
   d’Outre-Mer, 7 (25), pp. 25-50; Coursey, D. G. (1965). ibid.; Coursey,
   D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 22-5.
39 Chevalier, A. (1936). ibid.; Burkill, I. H. (1939). ibid.; Coursey, D. G.
   (1967). op. cit. pp. 59-60.
40 Murdock, G. P. (1959). Africa: its peoples and their culture history. New
   York. There is no point in discussing a wholly Asiatic origin for African
   yam cultivation, as this concept has now been discredited (see Coursey,
   D. G. and Alexander, J. (1968). ibid.)
41 Fagan, B. (1966). ibid.; Clark, J. D. (1963). ibid.
42 Davies, O. (i960). The neolithic revolution in tropical Africa, Trans.
   Hist. Soc. Ghana, 4 (2), pp. 14-20. Unpubhshed evidence from W.
   Stevenson suggests that derivation of these artifacts from local palaeo¬
   lithic sources, as proposed by Davies, is unlikely.
43 Isolated hunter/gatherer communities in both these areas still make
   extensive use of such wild yams and other “roots”.
44 Davies, O. (In press). Ntereso. Paper presented at the 8th Congress on Pre-
   and Proto-history, Prague (1966); Shaw, T. (1968). Radiocarbon dating
   in Nigeria. Ibadan, p. 10.
45 Davies, O. (1967). West Africa before the Europeans. London.
46 Coursey, D. G. (1967). op. cit. pp. 197-203, and further work under
   preparation. Festivals associated with yam cultivation were the major
   events in the annual socio-religious cycle in much of this area.
47 Henry, V. C. R. (1967). Studies on botanical and agronomic characteristics
   of cush-cush (Dioscofea trifida L.f.), Ph.D. Thesis, McGill Univ., and
   Private communication.
48 Chevalier, A. (1946). Nouvelles recherches sur les ignames cultivees,
   Rev. int. Bot. appl. Agric. Prop.-, 26 (279-80). pp. 26-31.
49 Leon, J. Private communication, from Instituto Interamericano de
   Ciencias Agricolas.
50 According to Leon, basing his opinion on Oviedo’s Historia General y
   Natural de las Indias, “aje” refers definitely to a white-fleshed form of
   sweet potato, not to any of the Dioscorea.
51 Rouse, I. (1962). The intermediate area; Amazonia and the Caribbean
   area, in Braidwood, R. J. and Willey, G. R. ibid.; Rouse, I. (1964). The
   Caribbean Area, in Jennings, J. D. Prehistoric Man in the New World.
   Chicago.
52 One of us (D.G.C.) is required to state that the opinions expressed here
   are his own and not necessarily those of the Tropical Products Institute.
      A. KRAPOVICKAS1

      The origin, variability and spread of the
      groundnut (Arachis hypogaea)

The origin and spread of the groundnut are of equal interest to ethnologists,
botanists and crop-scientists. Knowledge of this subject is certainly basic to
soundly based programmes for improving this important economic crop.
Several years have been occupied in the study of a large collection of South
American varieties maintained at the Experimental Station of Manfredi
(I.N.T.A. Cordoba, Argentina) and the time is opportune for a presentation
of conclusions drawn from this study. The material used consists of land races
(unimproved strains) collected from relatively unsophisticated cultivators in
some of the less readily accessible areas of Mexico, Peru and Bolivia. There
are, in addition, 1000 accessions collected in two expeditions to Paraguay,
Bolivia and Central Brazil with W. C. Gregory and J. Pietrarelli. The prime
object of these journeys was to collect material to clarify the taxonomy of the
genus Arachis and visiting the type localities of wild species. One area not
visited was the N.E. of Brazil, the original location of A. pusilla Benth.
  The author’s studies of variability within the cultivated species began with
descriptions of local varieties cultivated in central Cordoba Province, the
most important area of groundnut cultivation in Argentina2 and an analysis of
introgression in N.E. Argentina3.
   Material collected in Paraguay, Brazil and Bolivia has also been analysed
and this paper presents some of the results of this work and further observa¬
tions on Mexican and Peruvian material.



     Origin of Arachis hypagaea

The genus Arachis is confined to South America. It includes thirty species
and occurs in an area between the River Amazon and the Rio de la Plata and
from the Atlantic to the foothills of the Andes. The centre of origin of the
genus is probably in the Mato Grosso (Brazil) close to the Gran Pantanal.
Representatives are found there of all the sections into which we divide the
genus4.
428   Part IV Plants     krapovickas


  The outstanding morphological feature of this genus is the geocarpic fruit
produced by all species. In A. hypogaea the fruit has a single cavity which
contains 1-5 seeds. The characteristics of the fruits of wild species were
first described by Burkart5, the development of these fruits was interpreted by
Krapovickas and Rigoni6. In all wild species the fruit is articulated with two
single-seeded compartments, separated from each other by a filamentous
isthmus, the length of which varies according to species from a few milli¬
metres to about 20 cm. This must be due to the presence of two meristems in
the ovary one at the base, the other between the two ovules. In A. hypogaea
only the basal meristem functions which grows after fertilization to produce a
peg which buries the tip of the ovary. The ovules, once buried belowground,
grow and mature. The intercalary meristem normally fails in A. hypogaea
and for this reason the biarticulate pod may be considered as a wild character.
  The growth of the peg and isthmus is horizontal in the majority of species
from Central Brazil and may reach a length of one metre, flowers may be
aerial or subterranean. In A. hypogaea flowers are normally aerial and the
peg grows vertically both in the aerial and subterranean portions. This I
believe is important; from an area at approximately 57°W and westwards
there is an increase in the number of species with vertical peg development,
such types are commoner in the more peripheral areas.
  In attempts at interspecific hybridization attempted so far between A.
hypogaea and wild species more success is obtained when the wild species
pollen parent also has vertical peg growth than when this is horizontal7.
  The great majority of wild Arachis species are perennial but annual forms
are found in two district areas 2500 km. apart in the N.E. of Brazil and N.W.
Argentina and areas near the Bolivian frontier. In the latter area four species
have been found of which three are diploid and one A. monticola Krap. et
Rig. is tetraploid with 2n = 40 chromosomes. This species (from altitudes
1400-2800 m. above sea level in Argentina) is the only wild species to give
fully fertile hybrids with A. hypogaea. The only perennial species which can
cross with A. hypogaea to give viable hybrids are those with a taproot similar
to A. villosa Benth, 2n = 20 chromosomes and more or less vertical pegs.
Such hybrids have three genomes and are more or less sterile. The range of A.
villosa and its relatives is somewhat peripheral to that of the genus as a whole,
they occur to the west of the 57° meridian, that is west of a line marked by the
Rivers Paraguay and Uruguay. This evidence indicates that A. hypogaea has
originated farther to the west than had been thought previously and that it
arose in the periphery of the area occupied by this genus.
  It seems likely that A. hypogaea originated in Bolivia, at the base or in the
foothills ol the Andes. There exists in this area a very important centre of
variability of A. hypogaea subsp. hypogaea. This subspecies we believe has the
greatest affinity with the wild annual species and the perennials of the A. villosa
group shown by the occurrence of the runner habit, similar branching
pattern and absence of compound spikes.
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut     429


  It is curious that Bolivia is scarcely mentioned in older literature on the
groundnut yet it is not only an important centre of variation of the cultivated
forms but the area in which this crop plant arose. The diversity of use to
which groundnuts are put in the area indicates also that it has been present
there for a long time. In addition to the more customary uses it is employed in
the preparation of chicha de mani8 a refreshing non-alcoholic drink. In Santa
Cruz de la Sierra a soap is produced from it. In the woodland zone of
Northern Bolivia the natives eat the entire soft fruit with relish at the stage
when the pericarp is thick and juicy9.



      Intraspecific taxa of A. hypogaea

Earlier systems of classification have taken into account characters of the fruit
only10 or characters of the fruit together with habit, erect or prostrate11. Since
the importance of branching systems was recognized more rational classifica¬
tions have been produced12 and comparable results have been obtained from
cultivated peanuts of North America, Africa, Venezuela and Argentina.
  The study of branching habit and other vegetative characters is best
carried out on living plants which have been grown at low plant population
densities. Branching pattern has been correlated with the form and size of the
fruit, growth habit, the duration of the vegetative period, with seed dormancy
and with other characters. In this way it is possible to interpret the taxonomic
contributions of previous authors and understand their illustrations.
  In a previous work13 we proposed a taxonomic system dividing A. hypogaea
into two subspecies according to branching habit, alternate (subsp. hypogaea)
or sequential (subsp. fastigiata). A new varietal entity (var. hirsuta) which has
recently come to light should be added to this scheme.

Arachis hypogaea L.
  subspecies hypogaea
    var. hypogaea (= A. africana Lour.), the Brazilian type of Dubard14, the
          Virginia type of Gregory et a/.15
     var. hirsuta Kohler (= A. asiatica Lour.) the Peruvian type of Dubard16
          in part.
  subspecies fastigiata Waldron
    var. fastigiata the Peruvian type of Dubard17 in part, the Valencia type
          of Gregory et al.18
     var. vulgaris Harz, the Spanish type of Gregory et al.19

  The two subspecies are distinct entities, in addition to their morphological
differences they show divergence in physiological and genetical characters.
Groundnuts of subspecies hypogaea are generally prostrate, their seeds have
considerable dormancy, their vegetative period is long with a duration of from
5-10 months. In subspecies fastigiata plants are erect, the seed has no
430   Part IV Plants   krapovickas


dormancy and the vegetative period is short, 3-5 months, which permits two
crops per annum in some tropical areas. In crosses between the two sub¬
species we have observed progeny with lethal characters (albinos) or with
malformations. This confirms the observation of Hull20. Forms intermediate
between the subspecies are encountered much less frequently than those
intermediate between botanical varieties.



      The genocentres of groundnuts in South America

It has been possible by using Anderson’s method21 to analyse the patterns of
variability found in the indigenous strains of South America. It has been
shown for example that the great variability found in the Guarani region is
most probably due to introgressive hybridization. This has produced a
typical hybrid swarm from which we were able to determine the probable
prototypes which crossed freely among themselves and have as a result given
this region a special character. By extending this method to other areas of
South America we have identified different prototypes and we can delimit
distinct genocentres from a study of the patterns of variability produced.
  Although we are dealing with forms in cultivation at the present time, it is
possible to explain why the genocentres are static. In the localities visited
groundnuts were grown almost exclusively for subsistence, there was no
appreciable export trade nor had any cosmopolitan varieties been introduced
to these areas.
  At the present time we can recognize the following genocentres

1 The Guarani region, the basins of the Paraguay and Parana rivers
2 Goias and Minas Geraes (Brazil)
3 Rondonia and N.W. Mato Grosso
4 The Eastern foothills of the Andes in Bolivia
5 Peru.


      I The Guarani region


This includes a large part of the basins of the rivers Paraguay and upper
Parana bordering N.E. Argentina (Corrientes and Misiones), the East of
Paraguay, southern Mato Grosso and western Sao Paulo in Brazil. The
extent of this region eastwards is uncertain but it probably extends to the
Brazilian States of Parana, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul.
  The groundnuts of this region are almost entirely erect (subspecies
fastigiata); Valencia is the commonest form. The subspecies hypogaea is very
rare and is represented by two indigenous races, Guaycuru or Guanaco and
Rasteiro. These are very similar but are differentiated by testa colour,
salmon or reddish in Guaycuru and white with red streaks in Rasteiro \ the
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut     431


latter is characteristic also of the Overo variety of Argentina (Manduvi
Cabara or Mani cabra of Paraguay). These groundnuts occur along the length
of the upper Parana River and also in Ceres (Goias, Brazil). Rasteiro was
described as a species by Chevalier22 from fruits originating in Santa Catarina
(Brazil).
  In the Guarani region there is very little evidence of introgression between
the two subspecies of A.hypogaea, but there does exist a swarm of forms inter¬
mediate between the races belonging to subspecies fastigiata. In the course of
analysing this introgression we were able to identify the following prototypes,
all belonging to subsp. fastigiata

var. fastigiata Valencia and Porto Alegre
var. vulgaris Negrito and Spanish.

  Of these Porto Alegre and Negrito with dark violet testa colour are only
found in the Guarani region and their distribution can be regarded as co¬
inciding with the extent of this region. Valencia also occurs in the region of
Goias and Minas Geraes but specimens from this area show no evidence of
introgression. We have not found Valencia groundnuts in any of the other
three regions. It is possible that it has spread throughout the world from an
original location in Paraguay or Central Brazil and has given rise to numerous
cultivars, e.g. “Colorado de Cordoba” in Argentina and “Tatu” in Brazil.
  The “Spanish” groundnut characteristically has fruits with two seeds, the
testa is pale pink or light chestnut and abundant foliage is produced. We have
found it only in the Guarani region where it is most frequently found in N.E.
Argentina. It is not absolutely certain whether this race is truly indigenous in
this region or is a recent introduction. However, the Guarani region is a
centre of variation of the variety vulgaris and it is a reasonable assumption that
the Spanish groundnut has been disseminated from this region. There are
numerous cultivars of Spanish conformation, e.g. Macspan, Blanco Manfredi,
Dixie Spanish and Natal Common.


      2 The region of Goias and Minas Geraes


Our travels only covered the south of Goias and N.E. Minas Geraes but here
we met with a varietal pattern quite distinct from that of the Guarani region.
This region coincides with the basin of the River Tocantins and the river
San Francisco marks its eastward extent, here erect groundnuts (subsp.
fastigiata) predominate. We came upon only one example of subsp. hypogaea
in the vicinity of Ceres (Goias) which was like Rasteiro in having a red and
white testa.
  Cultivated races in this region belong in the main to subsp. fastigiata, both
varieties fastigiata and vulgaris are represented with little indication of
introgression between them. An important feature of this region is the
remarkable increase in frequency of the variety vulgaris, fruit size is larger
432   Part IV Plants      krapovickas


than in region i and is similar to that of the North American cultivars
Tennessee Red and Tennessee White. In our collection we have similar
material from Venezuela and Mexico. No material of Spanish type has been
collected in the area.

      3 The region of Rondonia and N.E. Mato Grosso (Brazil)


This region is not as yet well defined and requires further study, nevertheless
the data we have collected so far show that it has some very peculiar features.
The type specimen of A. nambyquarae Hoehne was collected in Pimenta
Bueno (Rondonia);this has a bi-coloured testa and we consider it belongs to
A. hypogaea subsp. hypogaea var. hypogaea. A. villosulicarpa also occurs in
the Mato Grosso23 cultivated by natives of Juruena and Diamantino. This
species is not closely related to A. hypogaea; it is diploid and perennial.
  In central Mato Grosso we have collected a number of erect groundnuts
with yellow testas, a colour not previously observed.
  This region is part of the Amazon basin and further exploration of this
river system will greatly increase our knowledge and enable us to elucidate
further its importance.


      4 The eastern foothills of the Andes in Bolivia


The outstanding feature of this region is the abundance of forms belonging
to subspecies hypogaea var. hypogaea. There is a great range of variability to
be found in habit and size of plant, in fruit characters and testa colour.
  The four representatives of var. fastigiata that we have collected from this
area are distinctly different from those of the other regions. We have not
collected any representative of var. vulgaris.
  In this region the groundnut is grown over a range of ecological con¬
ditions and at altitudes up to 2000 metres above sea level.
  In Bolivia we have observed several instances of introgression between the
two subspecies. The groundnut “Overo” or “Pintado” with red and white
testa occurs throughout the whole of Bolivia, this is frequently encountered
in the markets of La Paz, Cochabamba and Santa Cruz de la Sierra. It is a
different groundnut from Rasteiro or from Nambyquarae, because of its
semi-erect habit and its segregation for branching habit and seed coat colour.
It is possible that this form has arisen from crosses between var. hypogaea and
var .fastigiata. In Santa Cruz de la Sierra, we collected a form we have called
“Cruceiio” with plant habit and fruits similar to those of var. fastigiata but
with some features of “Pintado”. This could well be a product of intro¬
gression.
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut    433




     5 The region of Peru


In Peru we have collected two distinct types of groundnut, one very similar
to Virginia Runner, a common North American cultivar and the other with
fruits very similar to those found in the pre-Columbian tombs on the coast of
Peru. We presume that Virginia Runner is of recent introduction to the area,
the numerous collections made show little or no variability.
  The situation with regard the second type is very different. These are
characterized by very large fruits with marked constrictions between seeds,
very prominent veins and at the distal extremity a marked, parrot-like beak.
This type of fruit has been illustrated repeatedly in reports on pre-Columbian
remains from coastal Peru24 and is represented on pottery of the Mochica
culture. This groundnut may well be that which Monardes25 described from
the shores of the River Maranon thus “it is of the size of the middle finger,
round, twisted throughout, with a very neat design, its colour brownish, it
has inside a seed which rattles when dry somewhat like an almond with a
light-tan husk, it is white and breaks into two parts like an almond”.
  The fruits of the pre-Columbian type which we obtained in the Lima
market proved to belong to distinct types of plant, this suggests that we are
in a centre of variability for this groundnut. The fruits most like those of pre¬
columbian tombs belong to the subspecies hypogaea that is to say they are
prostrate, with alternate branching and late maturity and otherwise conform
to the description of the variety hirsuta Kohler (= A. asiatica Lour.). This
variety may show some peculiarities in its growth, for example the main axis
may grow to a length of a metre or more, far exceeding that of the runner
groundnuts of var. hypogaea. These groundnuts are still grown on the
Pacific coast.
  We have also found similar fruits, frequently coarser and with heavier
veins, belonging to subspecies fastigiala var. fastigiata. These have been
described and illustrated by Mazzani and Cobo26 under the name of “Tingo
Maria”. “Tingo Maria” does not appear to be the typical pre-Columbian
groundnut and probably originates in the woodland zone in Eastern Peru.
  Radiocarbon datings of groundnuts from Huaca Prieta in the valley of the
River Chacama at 850 b.c. have been obtained.
  There is general agreement on the nature of prehistoric Peruvian ground¬
nuts; however Towle27 points out that a smaller variety had also been found
with a slightly reticulated pericarp and without a dorsal ridge. This seems to
be rather similar to several cultivated varieties actually grown [in the U.S.A.
at the present time. This material was obtained in Lupe and is of the early
Ancon period.
  Dubard28 termed all these groundnuts “Peruvian type” but because he
used the number of seeds per pod as his principal diagnostic character, he
included Valencias in his Peruvian group. Valencias also have 3-4 seeds but
434    Part IV Plants    krapovickas


the fruit has no beak, no prominent ridges on the dorsal surface nor prominent
veins. Dubard’s “Peruvian type” includes both sequentially branched and
alternately branched forms. The alternately branched forms with 3-4 seeds,
rough pod with a parrot-like beak, the runner habit, fairly hairy and very late
maturing can be distinguished by the sum of these characters from Virginia,
Spanish or Valencia groundnuts.



       The relation between groundnut genocentres
       and indigenous tribes

A comparison of the genocentres described and the distribution of indigenous
ethnic groups in South America enables us to draw some very timely con¬
clusions. The existence of genocentres can be explained by geographical
isolation due to the great distances and the lack of contact between primitive
settlements. There is at the present time a dearth of information on the
groundnuts of the Amazon basin and the eastern foothills of the Andes from
Bolivia to Venezuela. Study of these regions would undoubtedly extend our
knowledge of the processes of domestication and spread of the groundnut.
  If we superimpose on the ethnic and linguistic map of South America29 the
present scheme of variation patterns of the groundnut we can see that
genocentre no. 1 coincides broadly with the distribution of the Guarani
Indians and no. 2 with that of the Ge people. The other three genocentres
each cover a mosaic of tribes. However it can be shown that there is some
affinity between genocentres no. 1 and no. 2 and none between these and the
remainder. In addition there is very little apparent affinity between groups
3-5-
  The establishment of relationships between these genocentres and the
indigenous cultures, although outside the scope of the present treatment, is
worth further detailed ethnological study. We suggest that for such a study
these possible correlations might serve as a useful working hypothesis.



       Spread of the groundnut

The groundnut is one of a number of American cultivated plants which
almost immediately after Columbus were disseminated and became estab¬
lished in the Old World. The rapidity of this spread has led some to postulate
an African origin, an opinion still to be seen repeated in some technical works,
but which has been discarded for the past century. The description of pre¬
columbian groundnuts from coastal Peru30 established the South American
origin of this plant31. Several theories have been elaborated to explain its mode
of spread.
  Right from the start comparative studies were made of the archaeological
                                 The origin and spread of the groundnut    435


groundnuts of Peru and those found in lands bordering the Pacific and
Indian Oceans (the Philippines, China, India, Madagascar, etc.) This
aroused interest in pre- and post-Columbian trans-oceanic relationships.
  Dubard32 was among the first to attempt an explanation of the spread of
groundnuts. He differentiated two types, the Peruvian with 3-4 seeds and the
Brazilian with 2 seeds per fruit. According to Dubard, the Peruvian type
similar to the pre-Columbian form of the tombs, must have been spread by the
Spanish in the Pacific basin and to Mexico and from there introduced to
Spain. The Brazilian type must have been distributed along the West
African coast by early Portuguese slave traders who bought it there.
  Bois33 split A. hypogaea into subspecies africana (Lour.) with prostrate
branches and asiatica (Lour.) with erect branches. According to Bois these
two subspecies correspond to the Brazilian and Peruvian types respectively,
of Dubard.
   Fruits similar to Peruvian archaeological groundnuts were mentioned and
illustrated by Skyortzow34 and by Ames35 from China. Anderson36 said “—the
most primitive type of peanut, the same narrow little shoestrings which are
found in the Peruvian tombs, are commonly grown today, not in Peru but in
. South China. How did they get there ?” The resemblances between Asiatic
and Peruvian groundnuts have been used to support theories of trans¬
pacific land connections. Merrill37 however denies the possibility of such
connections and supports the hypothesis that the spread of groundnuts
occurred along the old Portuguese trade route from Brazil to Goa and thence
to Canton and later Macau. This opinion of Merrill’s has been generally
accepted and illustrated in maps38.




      Spread in South America

Much light can be shed on this problem by studying the vernacular names of
A. hypogaea. The following list is based principally on information gathered
by I Gilii and Xuarez39, II Valdizan and Maldonado40 and III Rivet in
Chevalier.41

Betaca Pole              Mocobl42
Cacahuali                Piro, Chontaquiro (II)
Cacahuete                Mexican Spanish (I)
Cacuali                  Piro (II)
Curiquiere               Mojos (I)
Chemnakjai               Lenguas43
Choccopa                 Aymara (II and III)
Chocopan                 Araucanos44
Inchic                   Keshua (II)
Inchig                   Kichua quiteno (III)
436    Part IV Plants   KRAPOVICRSA


Inchik                   Peruvians and natives of Quito (I)
Inchis                   Kichua (III)
Inci                     Campa (II)
Inqui                    Antis (II)
Kadyahati                Hianakoto (Caribe) (III)
Kupekana                 Arawak (Tariana) (III)
Magua                    Guana45
Mandobi                  Brazilian Portuguese (I) Tupi (III)
Mandovi                  Pilaga46
Manduvi                  Chiriguano47
Man!                     Spanish American (I); Haiti (III); Aparai (Caribe)
                           (III)
Manobi                   Brazilian Portuguese (I) Tupi (III)
Manubi                   Guarani (I)
Maytapa                  Pacaguara (II); Pano (Pakaguara) (III)
Mondowi                  Tupi (III)
Mundubi                  Tupi (III)
Munui                    Tupi (III)
Naaquis                  Chiquitos (I)
Nioskita                 Choroti48
Sil’ari                  Itonama (III)
Tagalatic                Toba49
Tama                     Pano, Shipibo, Conibo (II)
Tlalcaca-huad            Mexican
Torah                    Colorado (III)
Yapiopeka                Tukano (Kobena) (III)
Yatubu                   Tukano (III)
Yaxtutu                  Tukano (Tuyuka) (III)
Yolique                   Mbaya (I)
Zebe                      Yurakare (II and III)


  The commonest names in use are “cacahuate” in Mexico, a name which in
Spain was transformed into “cacahuete”, in Brazil “amendoin” and in Para¬
guay “manduvi” and “main”. The latter is in fairly general use in the rest of
Spanish America, it is also the name mentioned by Oviedo50 from His¬
paniola. Reference to the above list shows that in the Tupi-Guarani
region there are numerous variants differing little from the actual name
“manduvi”. In the remainder of South America the names show little
affinity one with another. A large number of variants of “manduvi” occurs in the
languages from the eastern foothills of the Andes and between these linguistic
groups there are others having affinities with the Arawak tongues. The
Arawaks inhabit the area which extends from the Caribbean to the heart of
South America as far as the border of Bolivia with the Chaco.
   The presumed area of origin of A. hypogaea is in a region in which Arawak
                                   The origin and spread of the groundnut   437


linguistic influences predominate and it is rather remote from those of the
 Guarani. In spite of this coincidence and also their wide dispersion in
America, I do not necessarily conclude that the Arawaks are responsible for
the spread of the groundnut from its centre of origin as far as the Caribbean
islands. Such a hypothesis is however consistent with the evidence available
at the present time.



       Spread outside South America

The progenitors of the whole range of cultivars now widely dispersed
throughout the world originally came from South America. It is possible to
place all of them in the botanical varieties described previously, groups
lower in the taxonomic hierarchy require further study.
   The runners of coastal Peru (var. hirsuta) appear to have had their origin in
this area. Similar forms however are still cultivated in Mexico where they are
called “chino”. This name has no geographical significance but signifies in the
vernacular “wrinkled”, referring to the prominent veins and ridges of the
pod. “Chino” varieties of Mexico conform to the Peruvian type in having
alternate branching, runner habit, similar fruit and seed with violet testas.
These are long established cultigens in Mexico and are illustrated in
Clavigero51. Only fruits are shown but this author mentioned a vegetative
period of seven months which confirms that this groundnut belonged to the
subspecies hypogaea.
  Heiser52 commented on the lack of historical information on pre-columbian
cultivation of the groundnut in Mexico but mentioned the discovery by
MacNeish of a groundnut found at Tehuacan of the period 200 B.C.-700 a.d.
According to Hernandez53 the groundnut was probably taken from Haiti to
Mexico by the Spanish; if this was so the introduction was probably of the
Virginia type, evidently the form grown in the Antilles.
  The groundnut was soon taken across the Pacific by the Spaniards. The
first introduction to the Malayan archipelago was between 1521-9 or perhaps
some time after 157954. According to Bolhuis the first crops were of the
variety Katjang tjina, a runner plant with small two-seeded pod, without
strong markings and a vegetative period of 8-10 months.
   The groundnut probably reached China (Fukien province) in the early
seventeenth century, possibly even before 160855.
  The observations and more particularly later descriptions and illustrations
of material from the Western Pacific and Indian Oceans indicate that it was
the Peruvian groundnut which spread throughout these regions. It has been
variously named Chamaebalanus japonicus56, Arachis asiatica57, l’Arachide de
l’lnde58, and Arachis hypogaea™.
   Virginia groundnuts of runner habit (var. hypogaea) were apparently
introduced to the South-eastern United States with the slave trade60. A range
438   Part IV Plants     krapovickas


of improved forms have been produced in this area (e.g. Virginia Bunch)
which have become widespread. In general morphology the Virginia ground¬
nut agrees with the descriptions and illustrations of groundnuts from the
Antilles of seventeenth-century authors du Tertre, Labat and Plumier61. As
yet no mainland locality has been found in South America in which the
Virginia type has been of ancient cultivation nor in which it shows any
appreciable variation, it should be pointed out that studies of variability are
lacking in the N.E. of Brazil and in the Caribbean. (The Virginia type does
however show a very considerable range of variation in the African
continent62.)
  There is more information about the Spanish type (var. vulgaris). Gilii and
Xuarez63 record its introduction to Europe. The plant is illustrated under the
name Glycine subterranea and came from seed sent in 1784 from Brazil to Don
Jose Campos in Lisbon part of which was sent on to Rome. The greater part
of the variability of var. vulgaris has been recorded in Paraguay and the
Brazilian States of Goyaz, Minas Geraes and Sao Paulo, and therefore Brazil
is a very likely source of the original Spanish type. There is no evidence
against the view that the Spanish type was that which was spread by Tabares
de Ulloa64 (1799) in Valencia and from there it was taken to the South of
France at the beginning of the nineteenth century. According to Higgins65
this groundnut was introduced to the U.S.A. from Spain in 1871 and to
Africa early in the present century.
  Information on the Valencia type (vav.fastigiata) in the literature is of more
recent date. Dubard66 described the fruit but the first use of the name
“Valencia” was by Beattie67 referring to a new introduction to the U.S.A.
from Spain. Tonnelier68 referred to a groundnut with 3-4 seeds/pod from
Cordoba Argentina which is probably the present cultivar “Colorado de
Cordoba” a Valencia type groundnut. The centre of variation of the Valencia
group is in Paraguay and Central Brazil and it is possible that spread took
place from South America in the present century, via Spain as the name
suggests. The Valencia type has actually been cultivated on the Mediter¬
ranean coast and from this area it has been sent not only to the U.S.A. but to
other parts of Europe in addition to Asia and Africa.



      Notes

      1 This paper was originally given in Spanish to the XXXVIIIth Congreso
        International de Americanistas in September 1966 at Mar del Plata,
        Argentina. The translation is by J. Smartt.
      2 Rigoni, V. A., Krapovickas, A., and Pietrarelli, J. (i960). Las variedades
        cultivadas de mani en la provincia de Cordoba, Rev. Invest. Aerie., 14 (2),
        pp. 177-96.
      3 Krapovickas, A. (i960). Hibridacion introgressiva en manies de la region
        guarantica argentina, Rev. Invest. Agric., 14 (2), pp 161-75
      4 Krapovickas, A. and Gregory, W. C. (In press).
                                The origin and spread of the groundnut        439


 5 Burkart, A. (1939)- Estudios sistemtaicos sobre les Leguminosas-Hedi-
   sareas de la Rep. Argentina y regiones adyacentes, Darwiniana, 3 (2), pp.
    117-302.
 6 Krapovickas, A. and Rigoni, V. A. (1957). Nuevas especies de Arachis
   vinculadas al problema del origin del mani, Darwiniana, n (3), pp. 431-55.
 7 Smartt, J. and Gregory, W. C. (1967). Interspecific cross-compatibility
   between the cultivated peanut Arachis hypogaea L. and other members of
   the genus Arachis, Oleagineux, 22, pp. 455-9.
 8 Weddell, H. A. (1853). Voyage dans le Nord de la Bolivie. Paris.
 9 Scolnik and Luti, Personal communication.
10 Burkart, A. (1939). ibid.; Chevalier, A. (1933). Monographic de l’Arachide,
   Rev. Bot. Appliq., 13, pp. 689-789; Dubard, M. (1906). De l’origine de
   l’arachide, Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat. Paris, Bull., 5, pp. 340-4; Hermann,
   F. J. (1951). A synopsis of the genus Arachis, U.S. Dept. Agric. Agriculture
   Monograph, 19; Hoehne, F. C. (1940). Arachis, Flora Brasilica, 25 (122).
11 Bois, D. (1927). Les Plantes Alimentaires chez tous les Peuples et a travers les
   Ages, I. Paris; Chevalier, A. (1929), L’origine botanique et l’amelioration
   des Arachides cultivees. Rev. Bot. Appliq., 9, pp. 97-197; John, C. M.
   Venkatanarayana, G. and Sheshadri, C. R. (1954). Varieties and forms of
   groundnuts, Indian J. Agric. Sci., 24 (4), pp. 159-93.
12 Bunting, A. H. (1955). A classification of cultivated groundnuts, Emp.
   J. Exptal. Agric., 23, pp. 158-70; Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and
   Yarbrough, J. A. (1951). Morphology, Genetics and Breeding, in The
   Peanut, the Unpredictable Legume. Washington; Krapovickas, A. and
   Rigoni, V. A. (i960). La nomenclatura de las subespecies y variedades de
   Arachis hypogaea L., Rev. Invest. Agric., 14 (2), pp. 197-228; Mazzani, B.
   and Cobo, M. (1957). Caracteristicas varieties del mani, Agronomia
    Tropical, 7 (3), pp. 109-49.
13 Krapovickas, A. and Rigoni, V. A. (1957). ibid.
14 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
15 Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951). ibid.
16 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
17 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
18 Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951)- ibid.
19 Gregory, W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951)- ibid.
20 Hull, F. H. (1936). Inheritance of rest period of seeds and certain other
   characters in the peanut, Florida Agric. Exper. Station Bull., 314.
21 Anderson, E. (1949). Introgressive Hybridisation. New York.
22 Chevalier, A. (1929). L’Arachide Rasteiro du Bresil, Rev. Bot. Appliq., 9,
   p. 487-
23 Hoehne, F. C. (1944). Duas novas especies de Leguminosas do Brasil,
   Arq. Bot. Est. Sao Paulo, 2, pp. 15-18.
24 Costantin, J. and Bois, D. (1910). Sur les graines et tubercules des
   Tombeaux peruviens de la Periode Incasique, Rev. Gen. Bot., 22 (258), pp.
   242-65; Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.; Towle, M. A. (1961). The Ethno-
   botany of Pre-Columbian Peru. Chicago; Wittmack, L. (1887), in Reiss, W.
   and Stuebel, A. The Necropolis of Ancon in Peru, 3. Berlin.
25 Monardes, N. (1574). Historia Medicinal de las Cosas que se traen de
   Neustras Indias Occidentales que sirven en medicina. Sevilla.
26 Mazzini, N. and Cobo, M. (1957). °P- cit- Fi§- 4B-
27 Towle, M. A. (1961). ibid.
28 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
29 Steward, J. H. (ed.) (1950). Handbook of South American Indians, 6            .
   map 18.
30 Squier, E. G. (1877). Peru Illustrated. New York.
31 de Candolle, A. L. P. P. (1884). Origin of Cultivated Plants. London.
32 Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
440   Part IV Plants      krapovickas


       33 Bois, D. (1927). ibid.
       34 Skvortzow, B. V. (1920). On some varieties of peanuts grown in China,
           J. N. China Branch Roy. Asiat. Soc., 51, pp. 142-5.
      35 Ames, O. (1939). Economic Annuals and Human Cultures. Cambridge,
           Mass.
      36 Anderson, E. (1952). Plants, Man and Life. Boston.
      37 Merrill, E. D. (1954). The Botany of Cook’s Voyages. Waltham, Mass.
      38 Olivier, M. (1954). Le marche mondial des arachides, OUagineux, 9 (2),
          pp. 125-8; Johnson, F. R. (1964). The Peanut Story. Murfreesboro, N.C.
      39 Gilii, F. L. and Xuarez, G. (1789). Osservazione Fitologiche sopra alcune
          Pliante Esotiche Introdotte in Roma fatte nell’anno 1788. Rome. Translated
          in Furlong, G. (1954). Gaspar Juares, S. J. y sus Noticias Fitologicas.
          Buenos Aires.
      40 Valdizan, H. and Maldonado, A. (1922). La Medicina Popular Peruana.
          Lima.
      41 Chevalier, A. (1933). ibid.
      42 Zapata GolHn, A., (1945). Nomenclature mocobi de animales y plantas,
          Bol. Dep. Estud. Etnogr.y Coloniales, 1 (1), pp. 51-62. Santa Fe.
      43 Cervino, P. A. (1910). Vocabulario Espahol y Lenguas, en Catal. Razonado
          de las Secc. Lenguas americanas por B. Mitre, 2. Buenos Aires. (MSS. of
          1839.) pp. 145-60.
      44 Abregu, V. C. (1942). Idiomas Aborigenes. Buenos Aires.
      45 Cominges, J. de (1892). Vocabulario de Algunas Palabras en Idioma Guana.
          Obras escogidas de Juan de Cominges. Buenos Aires, pp. 247-9.
      46 Da Rocha, A. C. (1938). Vocabulario comentado Pilaga-Castellano,
          Comision Honoraria de Reducciones de Indios, 7. Beunos Aires.
      47 Metraux, A. (1930). Etudes sur la civilisation des indiens Chiriguano,
          Rev. Inst. Etnol. Univ. Nac. Tucuman, 1 (3), pp. 295-494.
      48 Hunt, R. (1915). El choroti 0 yofuaha. Rev. Mus. La. Plata, 10 (2nd
          series), pi. 23.
      49 Tebboth, T. (1943). Diccionario Castellano-Toba, Rev. Inst. Antropol.
          Univ. Nac. Tucuman, 3 (2), pp. 35-221.
      50 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1535). Prhnera Parte deai Historia Natural y
          General de las Indias. Madrid.
      51 Clavigero, F. S. (1787). The History of Mexico, 1. London.
      52 Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1965). Cultivated plants and cultural diffusion in
          Nuclear America, Amer. Anthrop., 67 (4), pp. 930-49.
      53 Hernandez, F. (1790). Opera, 2. Madrid.
      54 Bolhuis, G. G. (1955). La culture de l’arachide en Indonesie, Oleagineux,
          I0> (3)5 PP- 157-60-
      55 Currington Goodrich, L. (1936-7). Early notices of the peanut in China,
          J. Orient. Stud. Cath. Univ. Peking, 2, pp. 405-9.
      56 Rumphius, G. E. (1747). Herbarium Amboinense, 5. Amsterdam.
      57 Loureiro, J. (1790). Flora Conchinchinensis. Lisboa.
      58 Cordemoy, C. J. de. (1866). Note sur L’Arachide (lie de la Reunion),
          Adansonia, 6, pp. 249-53.
      59 Blanco, M. (1878). Flora de Filipinas. (3rd ed.), 2. Manila.
      60 Higgins, B. B. (1951). Origin and early history of the peanut, in Gregory,
          W. C., Smith, B. W. and Yarbrough, J. A. (1951). ibid.
      61 Chevalier, A. (1933). ibid.; Higgins, B. B. (1951). ibid.
      62 Gibbons, R. W. and Harkness,C. In preparation; Bunting, A. H. (1955).
          ibid.; Bunting, A. H. (1958). A further note on the classification of culti¬
          vated peanuts, Emp.J. Exptal. Agric., 26, pp. 254-8; Meikle, J. O. (1965).
          A survey of African-grown groundnut varieties in Rhodesia, Rhodesia
          Agric. J., 62, pp. 109-13; Smartt, J. (1961). Groundnut varieties of
          Northern Rhodesia and their classification, Emp. J. Exptal. Agric., 29,
          pp.153-8.
                                 The origin and spread of the groundnut       441


  63 Gilii, F. L. and Xuarez. G. (1789). ibid.
  64 Tabares de Ulloa, F. (1799). Relacion Sucinta en que se explica sencillamente
     el nuevo descubrimiento de sacar el aceyte del cacahuate 0 Mani de America.
     Valencia.


VO vo vo vo
     Higgins, B. B. (1951). ibid.
     Dubard, M. (1906). ibid.
     Beattie, W. (1911). The peanut, Farmers Bull., 431. Washington.
         r^OO
     Tonneher, A. C. (1912). Informe sobre el mani, Bol. Min. Agric., 14 (5),
     pp. 460-8.
      BARBARA PICKERSGILL

      The domestication of chili peppers


      Introduction

Chili peppers share with Phaseolus beans and the Cucurbits the distinction
of being among the first plants cultivated in the New World. Unlike the
latter crops, peppers never formed a staple part of the diet, but have always
been much-prized condiments. Both fresh and dried fruits contain a phenolic
compound, capsaicin, in the placentas, which gives them their characteristic
pungency.
  Several of the cultivated species of Capsicum are extremely variable. Bell
peppers, paprika, cayenne and the Mexican chilis are all forms of a single
species, C. annuum. This is the only species known to most Europeans,
although at least three others, C. baccatum, C. chinense and C. pubescens, are
still widely cultivated in South America, which is the centre of origin of this
genus.
  These species could be of recent origin; the products of a single domestica¬
tion followed by evolution and divergence under cultivation. Alternatively,
there may have been several distinct species before the development of
agriculture, each of which was subsequently domesticated from wild plants of
that species. These multiple domestications may have occurred independently
or the idea may have spread from one area to another, leading to experimen¬
tation with the rather different wild material available in different regions.



      Distribution of the domesticated chili peppers

Table i shows the probable pre-Conquest distribution of the principal
cultivated species of chili pepper. The most likely ancestor of cultivated C.
annuum is the wild bird pepper ( C. annuum var. minimum). This has a fairly
wide distribution, whereas cultivated C. annuum was limited to Middle
America in pre-Conquest times1. C. baccatum, on the other hand, has always
been restricted to South America. Wild plants (var. baccatum) occur only in
southern Peru and Bolivia. Cultivated types (var. pendulum) presumably
444    Part IV Plants     pickersgill


developed from these wild plants and are most frequent in Peru and Bolivia
but extend north up the west coast to southern Colombia. C. chinense has a
distribution which is complementary to that of C. baccatum, since C. chinense
attains its greatest diversity east of the Andes, in the Amazon Basin. It
extends also to the West Indies, and its range overlaps that of C. baccatum in
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia. C. chinense is closely related to, and possibly
originated from, a fourth species, C. frutescens. The latter includes the
cultivated Tabasco peppers and is widespread both as a weed and in cultiva¬
tion throughout Middle America and lowland South America. In highland
South America these species give place to a more hardy pepper, C. pubescens,
of which no wild forms are known.


Species                        Probable pre-Conquest distribution

C. annuum
   var. minimum   wild         Southern U.S., West Indies, Mexico, Central America,
                                 Colombia.
  var. annuum     cultivated   Southern U.S., Mexico, Central America.
C. baccatum
  var. baccatum   wild         Southern Peru, Bolivia.
  var. pendulum   cultivated   Southern Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, southern
                                 Brazil, northern Chile, and Argentina.
C. chinense       cultivated   West Indies, lowland South America south to Bolivia and
                                 southern Brazil.
C. frutescens     wild and     Mexico, Central America, lowland South America south
                    cultivated   to Bolivia and Brazil.
C. pubescens      cultivated   Highland South America.


Table i Pre-Conquest distribution of the cultivated species of Capsicum.


   Since there are wild plants related to most of the cultivated varieties, and
since the different species are separated by well-marked barriers to gene
exchange2, it is probable that these species existed before the development of
agriculture and that each was domesticated independently. Moreover, since
the species have somewhat distinct ranges even today, they were probably
domesticated in different areas by different groups. It is, of course, possible
that the wild varieties found today represent weedy plants descended from
cultivated varieties, but studies on their cytology and ability to intercross3
suggest that the wild varieties are more closely related to one another, and
hence closer to any common ancestor of this group, than are the cultivated
varieties.
   Little is known about a number of other species of limited distribution. In
Bolivia, fruits of C. cardenasii and C. eximium are collected and sold in the
markets, and the same is true of C. praetermissum in south-eastern Brazil.
Toleration rather than cultivation of useful but weedy peppers is character¬
istic also of primitive agricultural systems in Amazonia, where peppers seldom
seem to be sown deliberately but spontaneously germinating plants are
preserved even if they come up in the middle of the manioc patch or banana
                                         The domestication of chili peppers   445

grove. Peppers probably occupied a similar privileged status as tolerated
weeds in the initial stages of their domestication.



      Changes occurring under domestication

 Chili peppers are particularly favourable for studying evolution under
 domestication since so many of the species contain both wild and cultivated
varieties. These can be crossed and the genetic bases of the differences
between them studied. The archaeological record, although incomplete, may
date some of the stages in their domestication.
   Wild peppers all have in common small, red, pungent fruits, which may be
spherical, oval, conical or elongate, borne erect on the plant, and deciduous,
i.e. readily separating from the persistent calyx. The seeds are probably
dispersed by birds, attracted by the bright colour of the exposed fruits and
seen feeding avidly on the flesh of even the most pungent varieties. Under
cultivation, one of the first changes to occur was loss of this dispersal mech¬
anism. Since man was growing the plants for their fruits, he selected, con¬
sciously or unconsciously, for non-deciduous fruits which would remain on
the plants until harvested. This character is controlled by a single major gene,
and the dominant allele produces deciduous fruits4, so once a mutation to the
recessive, non-deciduous allele had occurred it would be relatively easy to
eliminate deciduous fruits by selection. The position of the fruits also
changed from erect to pendant. This was perhaps in part a consequence of the
increased size and weight of the fruit in cultivated forms, but a mutation to
pendant would again protect the crop from bird damage, since pendant fruits
are hidden amongst the foliage and not conspicuous.
   Size, shape and colour of the fruits also varied enormously under human
selection. Observations of this type have repeatedly been made on cultivated
plants, leading to the generalization that variability is greatest in that part of
the plant that is of economic importance. Red, orange, yellow and brown
fruits developed independently in all four cultivated Capsicum species and
there is also much parallel variation in fruit shape.
   Another effect of domestication seems to have been a shift to increased self-
pollination. Comparison of wild and cultivated varieties shows that wild
plants have relatively long styles exserted beyond the anthers, while in
cultivated plants the stigma is at or near the level of the anthers, so that self-
pollination is more likely. Self-incompatibility, reported for some wild species
of Capsicum, is unknown in cultivated varieties. Increased inbreeding could
have been caused by selection by man for high fruit set, or for plants which
bred true from seed, or by movement of the crop into an area in which
natural pollinating agents were uncommon. Once self-pollination is estab¬
lished, several distinct types can be grown in a small area without losing their
identities by intercrossing. Standley5 reported a practice among the Indians of
446   Part IV Plants    pickersgill

Guatemala which, if widespread, would also increase the amount of inbreed¬
ing. He stated that varieties of maize and beans “are often very local and
carefully guarded, but not because they are believed superior to varieties
grown by neighbours. The Indians cherish a firm belief that it is best to plant
seeds grown on the premises. Otherwise the plants would never be happy;
they would become homesick, as it were, pine away, and the crop would fail.”



      The archaeological record

Chili peppers have been identified from sites in both Middle and South
America. In Mexico, peppers have been recorded from MacNeish’s excava¬
tions in Tamaulipas6 and Tehuacan7. In both areas peppers are present in the
earliest levels, dating back to about 7000 b.c. This antedates the development
of agriculture and implies that wild plants were being exploited. These
Mexican specimens have sometimes been assigned to C. frutescens, but I
have seen photographs of broken fruits from Palo Blanco levels at Tehuacan
(700 b.c.-a.d. 200) and these relatively large fragments with the calyx still
attached look to me more like cultivated C. annuum.
   In South America, chili peppers have been found in sites on the coast of
Peru. Peppers are thus far unknown from pre-agricultural sites in this region,
which suggests that they did not occur wild here but were introduced from
elsewhere. The first plants cultivated were apparently gourds and squashes8,
but by 2000 b.c. peppers were grown in the Ancon area on the central coast9
and at Huaca Prieta on the north coast10. I have studied material from both
 areas and consider that these specimens came from cultivated, not wild,
 plants. Fruits from the lowest levels in both areas had the calyx attached,
 which suggests that the non-deciduous character, typical of cultivated plants,
 was already established. At Huaca Prieta, both red and orange fruits were
 present in the lowest levels, which again suggests selection under cultivation,
 since orange fruits are unknown among wild forms. Seed width also falls
 within the range of cultivated rather than wild plants.
    If the material is in good condition it is possible to identify more precisely
 the cultivated species represented in sites in South America. C. pubescens can
 be distinguished from C. baccatum and C. chinense by its black seeds, but it
 has not yet been recorded archaeologically. C. baccatum and C. chinense both
 have straw-coloured seeds, but C. baccatum has a toothed calyx with prom¬
 inent veins, while in C. chinense the calyx is entire and the veins less con¬
 spicuous. The fruits from Ancon and the lower levels of Huaca Prieta
 represent C. baccatum. This species was domesticated in southern Peru or
 Bolivia11. The material from both Huaca Prieta and Ancon belongs to the late
 Preceramic Stage and during this stage cotton, Canna and Canavalia beans
 also reached the coast, probably spreading from the same centre as C.
                                        The domestication of chili peppers   447


baccatum. This suggests that southern contacts played an important part in
the development of coastal cultures at this time.
   The Huaca Prieta specimens show that C. baccatum was gradually improved
under human selection. Seeds and fruits increased in size and deciduous
fruits were eliminated. However, in H.P.3 D2 and succeeding levels, mean
seed width decreased, deciduous fruits reappeared, and the shape and calyx
characters of some of the fruits suggest that a second species, C. chinense, at a
less advanced stage of domestication, was introduced. The centre of diversity
of C. chinense today is east of the Andes and its domestication was probably
connected with the development of agriculture in the tropical forests. It may
well have spread in association with manioc, which apparently reached the
coast of Peru at about the same time as this pepper.
   As more archaeological material becomes available, it should be possible to
assess more accurately the interplay between different areas of the New
World on the basis of changes in the cultivated plants. Present evidence
indicates that agriculture developed along surprisingly independent lines in
Mexico and Peru12. Even when die same crop was cultivated in the two areas,
it was often represented by different species, as for example the amaranths,
chenopods, Canavalia beans and chili peppers. In Peru, on the other hand,
although one might expect the desert coast and the Amazon jungles to have
been effectively isolated by the barrier of the high Andes, contact between the
different regions seems to have been effective and prolonged, as shown by the
presence of manioc, peanuts and C. chinense, domesticated in the tropical
forests, in prehistoric sites on the coast.



       The historical record

Chili peppers were a new and valuable spice to Europeans at a time when the
desire to obtain spices was providing a considerable impetus to exploration.
They were the most important spice encountered by Columbus in his un¬
successful attempt to find a route to the East Indies. Several of the Spanish
chroniclers thus devoted considerable space to these peppers.
  Perhaps Cobo13, who travelled throughout much of Spanish South America
early in the seventeenth century, has given the best description of the vari¬
ability then present in chili peppers. He reported that “one is as large as limes
or large plums; another, as small as pine nuts or even grains of wheat, and
between these two extremes are many different sizes. No less variety is found
in colour. . . . The same difference is found in form and shape; for one is
round; another, elongated, and others, of many other forms. . . . Finally, the
different kinds of peppers found in these Indies are so many that they exceed
forty.” Garcilaso de la Vega14 mentioned both yellow and brown fruited
forms [and both Acosta15 and Oviedo16 reported sweet varieties. It is thus
clear that the great variability in these peppers was established by the time of
448   Part IV Plants    pickersgill


the Spanish Conquest and was not a product of the trade and opportunities
for hybridization created by European colonization.
   It is difficult to identify the species recognized today in the chroniclers’
descriptions. The rocoto, described by Cobo17 as having a leaf “very different
from the other kinds of pepper, for it is much larger, not as smooth, of a dark
green” is probably C. pubescens, since this species has hairier leaves than most
cultivated varieties and is still called rocoto today. Oviedo18 described a pepper
which “has (small green fruits) mottled with black, . . . not the whole fruit,
but some part of it”. This is almost certainly C.annuum var. minimum, which in
Colombia is gathered while the fruits are still green. It has not proved possible
to distinguish between C. chinense and C. baccatum in the chroniclers’
accounts.
   All the chroniclers agree on the importance of peppers to the Indians.
According to Cobo19, “pepper holds first place, after maize, as the plant most
common and of greatest esteem amongst the Indians”. The fruits were used
in stews or soups, with meat or fish, and the leaves could be used to make a
sauce similar to parsley20. Salt and tomatoes were sometimes used to temper
the pungency of the fruits21. Besides being used fresh, the fruits were pre¬
served by pickling, which was the form preferred for sea voyages22, or by
drying.
   The value of pepper fruits to the Indians, and the fact that they could be
preserved and stored for some time, may have led to their becoming a form of
money in Peru, in the same way that cacao beans did among the Aztecs.
According to Valcarcel23, “under the Inca money was not known and certain
preferred products like peppers were perhaps the rudiments of a monetary
system. Until a few years ago one could shop in the plaza of Cuzco with the
so-called ‘Rantii’, which was a handful of peppers.”
   Not surprisingly, in view of their secular importance, chili peppers also
figured in religious belief and custom. One form of the Inca creation myth
names the four brothers who emerged at the beginning of the world as Manco
Capac, who became the first Inca, Ayar Cachi (Cachi = salt), Ayar Uchu
(Uchu = chili pepper) and Ayar Sauca (Sauca = pleasure). The allegorical
interpretation given by Garcilaso24 is that “by the salt they say that the
instruction which the Ynca gave in the rational life is to be understood. The
pepper represents the delight they received from this teaching, and the word
for pleasure is to show the joy and satisfaction in which they afterwards
lived.”



      Summary

The evolutionary history of chili peppers is being traced by a combination of
morphological, cytogenetical and archaeological studies. At least four species
were grown, in the New World at the time of the Spanish Conquest and these
                                          The domestication of chili peppers     449


species seem to have undergone parallel but independent domestication and
selection in different areas. Chili peppers are among the most ancient culti¬
vated plants and may prove as valuable as some inorganic artifacts in tracing
cultural contacts in the Americas25.



      Notes
      1 Smith, P. G. and Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1957). Taxonomy of Capsicum
        sinense Jacq. and the geographic distribution of the cultivated Capsicum
        species. Bull. Torrey Bot. Club, 84, pp. 413-20.
      2 Smith, P. G. and Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1957). Breeding behaviour of culti¬
        vated peppers, Proc. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci., 70, pp. 286-90; Eshbaugh,
        W. H., III. (1964). A numerical taxonomid and cytogenetic study of certain
        species of the genus Capsicum, Ph.D. thesis, Indiana University; Pickersgill,
        B. (1966). The variability and relationships of Capsicum chinense Jacq.,
        Ph.D. thesis, Indiana University.
      3 Pickersgill, B. 1966). ibid, and unpublished data.
      4 Lippert, L. F., Smith, P. G., and Bergh, B. O. (1966). Cytogenetics of the
        vegetable crops. Garden pepper, Capsicum sp., Bot. Rev., 32, pp. 24-55.
      5 Standley, P. C. (1946). Food plants of the Indians of the Guatemalan
        highlands, J. Arnold Arbor., 27, pp. 395-400.
      6 Kaplan, L. and MacNeish, R. S. (i960). Prehistoric bean remains from
        caves in the Ocampo region of Tamauhpas, Mexico, Botanical Museum
        Leaflets, Harvard University, 19, pp. 33-56.
      7 MacNeish, R. S. (1964). Ancient Mesoamerican civilisation, Science, 143,
        PP- 531-7-
      8 Lanning, E. P. (1965). Early man in Peru, Scientific American, 213, pp.
        68-76.
      9 Moseley, M. E., Personal communication.
     10 Bird, J. (1948). America’s oldest farmers, Nat. Hist., 57, pp. 296-303 and
        334-5-
     11 Pickersgill, B. Unpublished data.
     12 Heiser, C. B., Jr. (1965). Cultivated plants and cultural diffusion in
        Nuclear America, Amer. Anthrop., 67, pp. 930-49.
     13 Cobo, B. (1653). Historia del Nuevo Mundo. Reprinted in 1956 in Biblio-
        teca de Autores Espaholes, 91. Madrid. The quoted passages have been
        translated from this reprint.
     14 Garcilaso de la Vega, I. (1609). Comentarios Reales. Primera parte. Trans¬
        lated and edited by C. R. Markham for the Hakluyt Society Works, 2 (45),
        London. 1871.
     15 Acosta, J. de. (1590). Historia Natural y Moral de las Indias. Translated
        in 1604 by E. Grimston and edited by C. R. Markham for the Hakluyt
        Society Works, 60 and 61, London. 1880.
     16 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de. (1547). Historia General y Natural de las
        Indias. Reprinted in 1959 in Biblioteca de Autores Espaholes, 117, Madrid.
        The quoted passage has been translated from this reprint.
     17 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.
     18 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de. (1547). ibid.
     19 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.
     20 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.; Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1547). ibid.
     21 Acosta, J. de. (1590)- ibid.
     22 Cobo, B. (1653). ibid.
     23 Valcarcel, L. E. (1925). Del ayllu al imperio. Lima. The quotation has been
        translated from the Spanish.
450    Part IV Plants    pickersgill

      24 Garcilaso de la Vega, I. (1609). ibid.
      25 The work reported here was supported in part by a grant from the
         National Science Foundation of the United States to Dr. C. B. Heiser,
         Jr., who supervised the thesis from which this paper has developed. I
         should like to thank the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia,
         Mexico City, for photographs of pepper fruits from Tehuacan; Dr. M.
         Towle for loan of the specimens from Huaca Prieta in the Harvard
         Botanical Museum; and Mr. M. E. Moseley for making available speci¬
         mens and unpublished data from his excavations at Ancon.
      J. SMARTT

      Evolution of American Phaseolus beans under
      domestication

      Introduction

 Studies of crop plant evolution are of interest to both the plant breeder and
 the archaeologist. The plant breeder cannot hope to understand the present
 state of his crop plants without some knowledge of their evolutionary history
while the archaeologist needs to know the role which specific crops played in
the life of human communities in the past and for how long they have been
significant in them.
    Many botanists, geneticists and agriculturists have been interested in
studies of crop plant evolution. Typical of the kind of work which has been
done is that of Simmonds1 on bananas, Hutchinson et al2 on cotton and
several others3. Most evolutionary studies of crop plants have been a by¬
product of straightforward plant breeding projects. In the effort to broaden
the genetic base of a given crop plant land races or relatively “unimproved”
varieties were first exploited followed by ancestral wild forms and related
species. As a result of such work a more or less clear picture of probable
phylogenetic relationships has frequently emerged over a period. In the
present study this approach could not be used. The great mass of taxonomic
and genetical data necessary simply was not available.
   In the present world food situation the actual and potential importance of
the protein rich grain legumes is such that much more detailed study is re¬
quired before much improvement can be made in them. To form some idea
of the evolutionary history of a group of plants such as the New World species
of Phaseolus it has been necessary to consider the published evidence available
and where necessary to try to fill gaps as far as possible by further experiment
and observations. This work began in early 1965 at the School of Agriculture,
Cambridge under the direction of Professor Sir Joseph Hutchinson. A
considerable range of Phaseolus material had already been assembled and this
was added to quite considerably during the course of the work.
452   Part IV Plants    smartt




      Taxonomy

The genus Phaseolus belongs to the tribe Phaseoleae of the Leguminosae and
is related to other genera with cultigens such as Vigna and Dolichos. The more
conservative authorities consider that the genus Phaseolus contains about 150
species4. This number is probably inflated by synonyms, Mackie5 listed
18 for one species (Phaseolus lunatus L.) alone and this is probably not
exceptional.
   Four distinct groups can be recognized easily within the genus namely

1 Phaseolus proper or Euphaseolus6: the large seeded American beans
2 Macroptilium1: very small seeded American forms
3 Azukia8: rather small seeded Asiatic forms
4 Caracallae9: forms with characteristic “snail flowers”.

These groupings consist of forms which have similar flower and pod morph¬
ology which have been grown at Cambridge and are by no means a complete
breakdown of the genus. The taxonomic treatments of the genus available
at the present time are not only unhelpful but positively misleading; de
Candolle, Taubert and Piper10 all place some closely related species in
different sections of the genus. The quality of much of the herbarium
material available is very poor, without flowers very often and inadequate
for reliable determination in many cases. A modern taxonomic revision of
this important genus is long overdue.
   The New World cultivated species Phaseolus vulgaris L., Ph. coccineus L.,
Ph. lunatus L. and Ph. acutifolius A.Gr. were selected for study because they
are most widely disseminated members of the genus and adequate material
was available. Although accurate figures of the world production are not
available, it is probable that Ph. vulgaris is the most widely cultivated,
followed by Ph. lunatus and Ph. coccineus in that order with Ph. acutifolius in
the lowest rank. These beans have all come to the Old World in post-
Columbian times.



      Archaeological record

The archaeological record for Phaseolus in the New World is most impressive.
Kaplan11 has reported radiocarbon datings of 7000 b.p. for Ph. vulgaris from
Tehuacan, Mexico, 5300 B-p- for Ph. lunatus from Chilca, Peru, 5000 b.p. for
Ph. acutifolius from Tehuacan, Mexico and 2200 B.P. for Ph. coccineus also
from Tehuacan with a possible earlier dating of 7500-9000 b.p. from Ocampo
in Mexico. These dates take us up to early agricultural times in America, yet
Kaplan has reported that seed and pod material of Ph. vulgaris was basically
                                   Evolution of American Phaseolus beans      453


similar to modem beans. This suggests that the development of beans similar
to modem types occurred quite rapidly in early agricultural times.
   Kaplan has also concluded that Ph. lunatus was domesticated independently
in Pern and Mexico, these different domesticates can be distinguished easily
on seed size, the large, Peruvian macrospermus and the smaller Mexican
microspermus type. It seems quite probable that domestication of Ph. vulgaris
has been equally if not more complex; the present complex pattern of
morphological variation in Ph. vulgaris could be perhaps a result of a
complex pattern of domestication.
   Because beans have such a long history under domestication it is possible
that the divergence between the cultivated and wild forms has been so great
as to make it difficult to relate cultigens to their wild progenitors. There is the
additional possibility that the four species now in cultivation had a single wild
progenitor. Both questions can be resolved easily; wild forms of all four
species, obviously related to the forms in cultivation can be found. We can
conclude that the origin of specific rank differences between the four species,
all of which incidentally are diploid with 2n = 22 chromosomes, preceded
domestication.
   Kaplan has also pointed out the dietary importance of beans. Bean seeds
are rich in lysine and tryptophane, two essential amino-acids deficient in
maize. The two crops complement each other and together produce a reason¬
ably balanced diet. In the absence of domesticated animals this combination
of crops is highly advantageous and even at the present time, notwithstanding
 the introduction of cattle and other domestic animals, Phaseolus beans still
make an important contribution of protein to the Mexican diet.



      Comparative morphology of wild forms

      1 Growth habit

The wild forms of the four Phaseolus species we are considering have basically
the same growth habit. This they share with other wild species such as Ph.
polystachyus (L.) B.S.P., which have produced no cultigens. Ph. polystachyus
is called the thicket bean and its habit of growth enables it to become estab¬
lished and survive in such a plant community. The main axis is slender and
ascending and may reach a length of several feet, six or even more. Lateral
branches are produced profusely which initially are not ascending but grow
out more or less horizontally and straight for considerable distances (two
or three feet, perhaps more) before assuming the twining and ascending
pattern of growth. In this way thicket vegetation can become thoroughly
infiltrated by the growth of these plants in a relatively short time.
   Some differences in response have been observed in experimental cultiva¬
tion. The primitive form of Phaseolus coccineus {Ph. formosus H.B.K.) when
454   Part IV Plants    smartt


grown in open ground does not climb or scramble but first covers the soil
with a mat of vegetation, only when this is done will it climb. On the other
hand primitive Ph. vulgaris (ssp. aborigineus Burk.) is climbing in open
ground; in greenhouse cultivation however both forms are climbing from the
outset.

      2 Flower, fruit and seed characters

Lilac flowers are found in all four species in the wild. In addition red and
pink flowers are found in wild Ph. coccineus (the pink flowered individuals are
hybrid) and white flowers are found in some northern collections of Ph.
vulgaris ssp. aborigineus.
   Basic flower structure is very similar indeed in all four species. Size of
flowers is greatest in Ph. coccineus, least in Ph. lunatus. The stigmatic surface
is outwardly directed or nearly terminal in Ph. coccineus (JPh. formosus) and
inwardly directly in the others. This is associated with a greater tendency to
cross-pollination in Ph. coccineus. Self-pollination is perfectly feasible, the
stigmatic surface however requires scarification before pollen will grow in Ph.
coccineus-, this is not required in the other three species. The young pod is
rather fleshy in Ph. vulgaris and Ph. coccineus but fibrous in Ph. acutifolius
and Ph. lunatus. The number of seed per pod is characteristically never more
than four in Ph. lunatus but may range up to eight or nine in the other
species.
   Testa colour and pattern is basically similar throughout the four species
(and also Ph. polystachyus). This is basically grey or brown with a dense
pattern of darker spots and blotches. Self-coloured testas do occur, black-
seeded Ph. lunatus and Ph. vulgaris and buff-seeded Ph. coccineus (formosus)
have been collected from the wild.
   Seed dormancy occurs as a rule due to “hard-seededness”, in addition Ph.
acutifolius requires a post-harvest maturation period before germination can
occur.
   Flowering and fruiting in Phaseolus may be affected by day length, a
common enough occurrence in plants from low latitudes. In the Cambridge
collection of Phaseolus, wild representatives of Ph. vulgaris have the most
rigid photoperiodic requirement; one accession from N.W. Argentina does not
flower before October under normal day lengths in England. Other lines will
flower earlier than this but not usually until the summer solstice is past. It is
possible to induce such forms to flower in Spring by early sowing in the
greenhouse. Two distinct types of photoperiodic response have been
observed, the first for a specific day length and the second for a declining
day length. This subject merits detailed study under carefully controlled
conditions.
  In addition to photoperiod-sensitive lines, day-neutral strains can be found
which will flower at almost any time of the year under long or short days.
                                  Evolution of American Pbaseolus beans      455




      3 Variability in wild populations

The sampling of wild populations we have been able to make is much smaller
than we would have liked but it does indicate that the variability within each
species in the wild may be quite considerable. Some of the conclusions we
might draw from the changes we believe to have followed domestication
must be subject to the proviso that such differences might already have
existed in wild populations, though perhaps not extensively. There can be
little doubt however that in the early days of domestication, progress in the
improvement of beans was assisted by the variability which existed in the
populations of the wild form of a given species.



     Ecological considerations

In nature all four species do not occur together in the same habitat. A range of
habitats is exploited from the cool, moist montane conditions in which Ph.
coccineus flourishes to the arid, semi-desert conditions in which Ph. acutifolius
is found. Warm temperate conditions are optimal for Ph. vulgaris whereas Ph.
lunatus grows best in the tropics and sub-tropics.
   The environments which the members of this genus can exploit cover an
enormous geographic range from Scandinavia to New Zealand; it is regret¬
table that these valuable plants are not exploited more fully, especially in the
tropics where they could provide additional protein for human nutrition.

     Response to domestication


The New World cultigens in the genus Phaseolus provide an opportunity to
test Vavilov’s principle of homologous variation. One would expect responses
to be qualitatively similar and to a considerable extent they are. Of course the
selection pressures to which the different species have been exposed are
different and the differences in response under domestication will in all
probability reflect this. This does not of course exclude the possibility that
the species have inherently different capacities to respond. The actual re¬
sponse must therefore depend on both the capacity for response and the
intensity of selection imposed.

     1 Morphological responses

(a) Growth habit.    The most obvious effect of domestication on most
Phaseolus is the modification of growth habit. To take Phaseolus vulgaris as an
example, the physical difference in growth form between the wild ssp.
aborigineus and a cultivated dwarf French bean variety is enormous. The
16—DOPAA   *   *
456   Part IV Plants    smartt


differences between climbing or “pole” varieties and the wild forms are less
but they are none the less real.
   The major difference between wild and climbing beans on the one hand
and the dwarf varieties on the other is principally in branching pattern. In the
wild and climbing forms growth is indeterminate, the axes continue to grow
indefinitely whereas in most dwarf varieties after the production of seven or
eight nodes or less, growth of the main axis is terminated by an inflorescence.
Lateral branches are terminated in a similar fashion. This difference is under
very simple genetic control, by a single locus. Typical 3:1 ratios are given in
F2 for crosses indeterminate X determinate in Ph. vulgaris, Ph. coccineus and
Ph. lunatus12.
    The differences between primitives and climbers are rather more subtle.
 In both the main axis is ascending and behaves similarly. The behaviour of
 the lateral branches is quite different. In the primitives these are numerous
 and can grow to enormous lengths. In cultivated climbers these are very
 considerably reduced in number and if they grow to any considerable length
 are ascending from the outset, there is no diageotropic tendency. In the most
 advanced climbers the growth form is pyramidal, the first laterals are the
 longest, successive branches are progressively shorter. Laterals are often
 produced only at the first seven or eight nodes.
   The selection of growth habits has been related to development of agricul¬
 tural practice. It is generally believed that maize and beans were grown
 together. The maize stalks provided support for climbing beans. However if
 beans with the wild growth habit were grown, unless the maize plants were
 well separated the whole plot would become an enormous tangle by the time
either the beans or maize were mature. A reduction in the production of
lateral branches is clearly advantageous in these circumstances. This seems to
have come about by selection at the polygenic level. Among domesticated
climbing beans there is a considerable range of variation in the extent to
which lateral branching is suppressed.
   After a period of mixed cropping of maize and beans, single crop cultiva¬
tion was probably attempted and in these circumstances the dwarf-determin¬
ate growth habit was advantageous. In nature or in mixed cultivation the
dwarf determinate mutation would have been effectively lethal. It is of course
on the dwarf-determinate form that the present commercial production of
beans for canning and processing is based. Man has here preserved and
propagated a key mutant in Phaseolus on which its future as a crop plant has
depended. Kaplan13 has mentioned vegetative remains of a dwarf bean 800
years old which was found in Tamaulipas. Since differences in seed characters
are not correlated in any way with growth habit nothing can be inferred in
regard to the growth form of more ancient material.
   Ojehomon11 at Cambridge studied comparatively the development of
indeterminate and determinate forms of Ph. vulgaris and has suggested that
the terminal inflorescence of a determinate is equivalent to the axillary
                                Evolution of American Phaseolus beans      457

inflorescence of an indeterminate at the seventh or eight node on the main
axis. That is the lowest node which bears an inflorescence. Froussios (un¬
published) has classified three distinct growth forms on the basis of both
growth habit and branching pattern these are:

1 Indeterminate climber
2 Indeterminate bush or dwarf
3 Determinate bush or dwarf.

To this list the class indeterminate-scramblers represented by the primitive
forms can be added.
   The full range of growth forms can be found in Ph. vulgaris. No dwarf-
indeterminates have been reported in Ph. coccineus and Ph. lunatus; however,
all cultivars of Ph. acutifolius are of this type.

(b) Size of vegetative plant parts.  We have considered how under domesti¬
cation the production of lateral branches has been reduced in the climbers
and the length of the main axis and lateral branches has been curtailed in
dwarf forms. Without compensating increases in the size of plant parts, stems
and leaves principally, it is doubtful whether the plant could have responded
successfully to selection. A determinate mutation in the genetic background
of Ph. vulgaris ssp. aborigineus would have produced a spindly plant perhaps
six inches high with very low productive capacity. It seems probable that
what has happened is that selection for increase in leaf and stem size proceeded
hand in hand with that for reduction in production of lateral branches. The
genetic control of these could well be independent. Certainly experimentally
produced F2 progeny from the cross Ph. coccineus cr. Hammond’s Dwarf
Scarlet X Ph. coccineus {Ph. formosus) show segregants combining the
determinate dwarf habit of the cultivar with the small leaf of the primitive
parent.
   The consequences of domestication have been reductions in the number
of branches and leaves with a compensating increase hi leaf size together with
correlated increases in stem diameter. When the new balance was struck in
the climbers, the determinate mutant became viable in cultivation because
the individual plant had sufficient leaf area to produce an adequate yield of
crop.
   The response pattern outlined has been recorded in all species but Ph.
acutifolius. In this species leaf and stem size have not increased, the plant
habit is bushy rather than climbing and no determinate forms have become
established.

(c) Changes in reproductive plant parts.    Flower size is appreciably larger in
cultigens of Ph. coccineus and Ph. vulgaris than in primitive forms but little or
no change has apparently occurred in Ph. acutifolius and Ph. lunatus. Changes
in flower colour have occurred: white flowers are found in cultivated Ph.
458   Part IV Plants     smartt


coccineus, Ph. lunatus and Ph. acutifolius but not in the wild, and lilac flowers
are found among the cultigens of all species except Ph. coccineus. Every
species therefore has two common flower colour variants, red and white
in Ph. coccineus and lilac and white in the other species.
   The most important change which has taken place in the reproductive
parts is pod and seed size. Seed number per pod has not changed significantly
except in Ph. acutifolius in which up to nine seeds may be found in wild forms
but rarely more than six in cultivars. Pod and seed size has increased most in
Ph. coccineus; primitive pods rarely if ever exceed three inches in length. Pods
of cultivars with the same number of seeds may be well over a foot in length.
The weights of individual seeds of any wild species do not usually exceed
o-i gm. by very much; the seed of cultivars of Ph. coccineus may be as much as
i-o gm. in weight. Seed weight has increased by a factor of about eight. In the
other species increases in pod and seed size have not perhaps been as great but
in Ph. vulgaris and Ph. lunatus they are none the less striking and a five- or
six-fold increase at least has been achieved in some cultivated varieties. In Ph.
vulgaris there is a continuous range of seed size from the primitive to the
largest seeded cultivated form. In both Ph. coccineus and Ph. lunatus there is
at the present time a very sharp discontinuity between primitive and culti¬
vated races in seed size. A much less striking increase in seed size has occurred
in Ph. acutifolius, probably only by a factor of three.
  Preliminary studies have begun on the inheritance of seed size in Ph.
coccineus. The indications are that it is determined polyfactorially but no
estimate of the number of effective factors can be made at the present time.
  One of the most remarkable features of cultivated beans is the enormous
range of testa colours and patterns which can be found. Four main colour
groups have been identified in Ph. vulgaris; similar groups doubtless occur
but have not been studied as extensively in other species. They are white,
black, red and brown. Superimposed on these ground colours may be various
patterns of spots, flecks, stripes and eyes. The genetics of basic testa colours
is fairly simple with probably at least two loci involved; that of the
patterns is more complex.
  An important property of the testa is its permeability to water. Wild
species are characteristically hard-seeded and unless the seed surface is
abraded do not absorb water readily. Kaplan15 considered that the loss of this
property was an important factor in the domestication of beans. Cultivated
beans as a rule absorb water readily through the testa without abrasion.
Rathjen11’ at Cambridge has found that hard seed may be produced by Fx
intervarietal hybrids in Ph. vulgaris. These hybrids were between lines of
poor genetical combining ability and much of the seed was rather poorly
developed. It has been suggested that the relative growth of embryo to testa
is greater in cultigens than in wild forms and that stretching increases
permeability. In the reported instances where embryo growth is poor the
testa is unstretched and may be impermeable as a result.
                                     Evolution of American Phaseolus beans    459

   Pod structure is basically similar in wild forms and the more primitive
 cultigens. In cultigens generally there is a tendency for dehiscence to be
 reduced without necessarily any gross change in anatomical structure. Apart
 from this consideration no other change has occurred in the pods of Eh.
 lunatus and Eh. acutifolius, under domestication both are very fibrous. Pods of
 Eh. vulgaris and Eh. coccineus are even in the wild state less fibrous than those
of Eh. lunatus and Eh. acutifolius. Under domestication the fibre content of
the pods has been further reduced, more so in Eh. vulgaris than in Eh.
coccineus. Three distinct pod textures are found in Eh. vulgaris namely:

 1 parchmented—very fibrous—dehisces strongly at maturity
2 leathery—less dehiscent—splits readily along the sutures
3 stringless—indehiscent—does not split readily along the sutures.

   Varieties with parchmented pods are used entirely for dry seed production,
leathery podded varieties can be used either for green pod production when
young or haricot production when fully mature. Stringless beans are used
entirely for the production of green pods.


     2 Change in life form


Eh. coccineus and Eh. lunatus are perennial species fundamentally although in
cultivation frequently treated as annuals. The determinate forms of both
species show a tendency towards the annual life form. Eh. vulgaris ssp.
aborigineus includes both annual and perennial forms, the accessions in the
Cambridge collection from Argentina are annuals, a single accession from
Mexico is perennial and produces a similar type of root-tuber to Eh. coccineus
and Eh. lunatus. Eh. acutifolius is a strict annual.
  There is a tendency under domestication for selection towards the annual
life form, this is reinforced by the ever increasing use of determinate dwarf
forms.

     3 Ehysiological responses


(a) Fhotoperiod sensitivity. The genus Ehaseolus in America has its centre of
distribution in tropical and sub-tropical latitudes. Collections of cultivars
from this area almost invariably include forms which are photoperiod
sensitive. Photoperiodic response shows a range from day-neutral to a require¬
ment for a twelve hour day for flower induction. In Eh. vulgaris photoperiod
sensitivity is not confined to any particular morphological type and is found in
them all, likewise day-neutrality. The occurrence of varying degrees of
photoperiod sensitivity in wild forms suggests that the alleles for day length
sensitivity have never been fixed. The migration of Eh. vulgaris into North
America in pre-Columbian times ensured that day-neutral alleles were fixed
in these populations but not in those near the centre of origin.
460   Part IV Plants    smartt


  Segregations in F2 of hybrids between a photoperiod-sensitive primitive
and a day-neutral cultivated type gave typical monofactorial ratios of 3
sensitive : 1 day-neutral. The range in photoperiod sensitivity suggests that
other genetic loci may influence the expression of this character.


(b) Seed dormancy.     In addition to dormancy imposed by hard seed, there is
dormancy in primitive Ph. acutifolius which is apparently imposed by a post¬
harvest maturation period. There is some evidence that this may also occur in
Ph. vulgaris ssp. aborigineus. In general, however, no difficulty has been found
in germinating fairly fresh seed (i.e. within two months of harvest) of other
species.

      Experimental hybridization

Crosses have been made experimentally between primitive and cultivated
forms of all four species. Fertility of the Fx hybrids has been perfectly normal
with very few exceptions and F2 progenies have been raised and examined.
Simple monofactorial segregations have been observed for branching pattern,
photoperiod sensitivity and flower colour. Seed size and seed coat colour
segregations are more complex and require much more detailed study.
Certainly there are no grounds to suppose that there is any kind of fertility
barrier between primitive and cultivated forms. Flower and seed morphology
differs most widely between Ph. coccineus cultivars and the presumed primitive
ancestral form Ph. formosus. The stigma of Ph. coccineus is lateral, elongate
and outwardly directed; in Ph. formosus it is capitate and terminal. The seeds
are nearly circular in outline, the hilum a broad oval in Ph. formosus, whereas
Ph. coccineus seeds are more kidney-shaped and the hilum is elongate. In the
three other species there is very close correspondence in flower and pod
morphology between primitive and cultivated forms. Although de Candolle
more than a century and a quarter ago suggested that Ph. formosus was
ancestral to Ph. coccineus, it is possible that an undescribed form may yet
exist which is actually closer to the ancestral type.



      Conclusion

In conclusion it can be said that the response of New World Phaseolus species
does provide a good illustration of Vavilov’s principle of homologous varia¬
tion. In three of the four species, dwarf determinate forms occur and in two
of them it is possible to demonstrate that an homologous locus is probably
involved. In F2 progeny from an interspecific hybrid Ph. vulgaris (dwarf
determinate) x Ph. coccineus (dwarf determinate) no segregation for branch¬
ing habit was observed. It is not possible to cross either of these species with
Ph. lunatus and establish genetic homology directly, but morphologically the
                                   Evolution of American Phaseolus beans       461

result is the same and a homologous locus in all probability does control
branching habit in the three species.
   The suppression of lateral branching in domesticated climbers accom¬
panied by an increase in size of leaf and stem has followed a similar pattern in
Ph. vulgaris, Ph. coccineus and Ph. lunatus although the most perfect pyra¬
midal form is developed in Ph. vulgaris. In physiological terms the cultivated
types show more pronounced apical dominance. The dwarf indeterminate
growth form is subject to environmental modification. Ph. vulgaris varieties
and cultivated Ph. acutifolius which develop this habit of growth out of doors
may under greenhouse conditions behave as indeterminate climbers. It is
possible that this change in form is controlled by the production of a growth
substance, most probably a gibberellin, which is suppressed under conditions
of high incident ultraviolet light.
   Some question might also be raised on the question of determinate vs.
indeterminate growth habits. The typical determinate dwarf cultivated bean
bears its terminal inflorescence after not more than seven or eight nodes have
been produced on the mam axis. In both Ph. vulgaris and Ph. coccineus
climbing forms occur in which growth in length of the main axis is terminated
by an inflorescence after twenty or even more nodes have been produced.
This suggests that growth habit may be controlled by genes affecting in the
first place internode length and secondly node number.
   A general response in all beans to domestication has been increased seed
size. Segregation data of F2 progeny studied so far indicate that this is
probably polyfactorial. Detailed biometrical study of this important character
is most certainly needed.
   There is little doubt that in domestication Ph. vulgaris has proven to be the
most versatile. It has produced the greatest range of variants, in growth
habit, seed shape, seed-coat colour and pod texture. The environmental
range is however restricted to warm and cool temperate climates and herein
lies the greatest potential for future improvement. A versatile legume such as
Ph. vulgaris could be exploited very intensively in the tropics if it could be
grown there satisfactorily. There is the possibility that the production of
amphidiploids between Ph. vulgaris and Ph. acutifolius might be a step in this
direction, if they possessed the heat tolerance of Ph. acutifolius without serious
loss of the pod and seed quality of Ph. vulgaris.
   Kaplan17 has pointed out that in recent historic times the cultivation of Ph.
acutifolius has contracted to a marked degree in Mexico and it seems quite
likely that this species will disappear from cultivation in a relatively short
while. The possibility of making use of it in hybridization should however be
 borne in mind. There seems to be no immediate danger of the remaining two
 species going out of cultivation, largely because these species extend beyond
 the effective range of Ph. vulgaris cultivation, Ph. coccineus into cooler climatic
 zones and Ph. lunatus into tropical regions.
   We are still unable to pinpoint any single decisive factor which has
462    Part IV Plants     smartt


established Ph. vulgaris in its pre-eminent position among Phaseolus beans
but the following factors are probably the most important.

1 an inherent capacity to respond to selection
2 the heavy selection pressures applied
3 an early wide dispersion and selection over a range of temperature environ¬
  ments in pre-Columbian times favouring a very rapid spread in post-
  Columbian times.
  The factor which has limited the spread of Ph. vulgaris has of course
preserved the range of four species now in cultivation. There is no doubt
that Gause’s law can be applied to crop plant species as well as those in the
wild. Just as two very similar species cannot coexist indefinitely in the same
natural habitat and exploit it in exactly the same way so two very similar crop
plants will not persist indefinitely in cultivation under any given set of
environmental conditions; one or other will fall by the wayside.



      Notes
        1 Simmonds, N. W. (1962). The Evolution of the Bananas. London.
       2 Hutchinson, J. B., Silow, R. A. and Stephens, S. G. (1947). The Evolution
           of Gossypium. Oxford.
       3 Darlington, C. D. (1956). Chromosome Botany and the Origins of Cultivated
          Plants. London; Hutchinson, Sir J. (ed.) (1965). Essays on Crop Plant
          Evolution. Cambridge; Schwanitz, F. (1966). The Origin of Cultivated
          Plants. Harvard.
       4 Rendle, A. B. (1925). The Classification of Flowering Plants, 2. Cambridge.
       5 Mackie, W. W. (1943). Origin, dispersal and variability of Phaseolus
          lunatus, Hilgardia, 15, pp. 1-29.
       6 Bentham, G. (1862). Genera Plantarum, 1. Hookerian Herbarium, Kew.
       7 Hutchinson, J. (1964). The Genera of Flowering Plants, 1. Oxford.
       8 Ohwi, J. (1953). Flora of Japan. (Japanese.) (Eng. trans. 1965.) Smith¬
          sonian Inst., Washington.
       9 de Candolle, A. P. (1825). Prodromus, 2. Paris.
      10 de Candolle, A. P. (1825). ibid.; Taubert, P. (1891), in Engler, A. and
          Prantl, K. Die Natiirlichen Pflanzen familien, 3. Leipzig; Piper, C. V.
          (1926). American genera of Phaseolineae, Contributions, U.S. National
          Herbarium, 22, p. 9.
      11 Kaplan, L. (1965). Archaeology and domestication in American Phaseolus
          beans, Econ. Bot., 19. pp. 356-68.
      12 See also Allard, R. W. (1953). Inheritance of morphological characters in
          lima beans, Hilgardia, 22, pp. 283-9.
      13 Kaplan, L. (1965). ibid.
      14 Ojehomon, O. O. (1966). The development of flower primordia of
          Phaseolus vulgaris (L.) Savi, Ann. Bot., 30, pp. 487-92.
      15 Kaplan, L. (1965). ibid.
      16 Rathjen, A. (1965). Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge.
      17 Kaplan, L. (1965). ibid.
      W. R. STANTON

    Some domesticated lower plants in South-east Asian
food technology


  The philosophy underlying the subject of the domestication of lower plants
  has come under close scrutiny as part of the rapid expansion of research in
  recent years into various novel methods of satisfying man’s requirement for
  food, that is, in the face of a rapidly increasing world population.
     I have used, in the title to this paper the broad taxon “lower plants” to
 distinguish this process of plant evolution under the influence of man from
•that of the previous speakers who have all been dealing with higher plants,
 that is Angiosperms. The so-called lower plants comprise a very wide variety
 of life forms most conveniently distinguished from the higher plants by their
 reproductive system, but they may be considered from the point of view of
 the present discussion as plant forms which do not normally occupy the environ¬
 ments provided by agriculture, except to interfere with the normal course of
 agriculture by causing diseases of higher plants, deterioration and spoilage,
 and superficially interfering with man’s agricultural efforts.
    However, on closer inspection of agricultural evolution in its broadest sense,
 including fertility improvement, food harvesting, storage, and processing
 (and in this context I include both the harvest of animals as well as the
 gathering of plant parts), it is realized that a great diversity of autotrophic,
 heterotrophic and parasitic plant forms associated with the main economic
species have undergone concomitant changes. As with higher plant breeding,
it is only within very recent times that a positive breeding approach has been
directed towards the secondary organisms involved in natural-product
production and utilization.
    The term “plant” is of great antiquity as applied to the micro-organisms of
Western food technologies. One has only to think of such terms as “vinegar
plant” and “ginger-beer plant”; mushrooms and seaweeds used for food have
also been described in this way. Otherwise, the lay classification made the
distinction between “moulds”, “slimes”, and “ferments”, the recognition of
the role of lower-plants in the last category being of relatively recent origin.
    The constructive role of micro-organisms under domestication is almost as
diverse as that of the higher plants of agriculture. This has not been solely a
464   Part IV Plants    STANTON


consequence of higher plant and animal domestication. Lower plants have
opened up new possibilities in terms of food production and recovery,
flavour improvement, toxic component removal, utilization of waste for food,
supply of essential secondary food constituents, and such activities as binding
by their thread-like structures, or disintegration from the activity of their
extra-cellular enzymes as the need arose. Extra cellular enzyme processes are
familiar in the technology of retting and the saccharification of starches.
   A major part of the work of the microbiology department at the Tropical
Products Institute is concerned with the diversity of constructive roles of
micro-organisms as will be seen from Fig. 1.
   I have confined my discussion to particular aspects of South-east Asian
food technology for reasons which I will explain in a moment.
   Even if one excludes the technologies of the manufacture of cheese, bread,
beers, wine, vinegar and so on, lower plant domestication is not exclusively a
tropical phenomenon. For instance, seaweeds are of very ancient usage in
Welsh (lava-bread)1 and Norwegian food technology; lactic acid fermentations
are important in the fermentation of temperate zone vegetables, although they
assume a greater importance in the tropics2.
   However, in a tropical and sub-tropical environment the food preservation
methods of chilling, salting, and drying are impossible or less freely available.
Even after treatment of the harvest by the second two methods, infection
of the products with micro-organisms is likely to occur.
   It is this interaction, that is “the presence of high salt concentration plus
partial dehydration”, which is employed in the characteristic fermented fish
sauces and pastes of South-east Asia. These products are daily items of diet
and contribute as much as one third of the daily protein requirement, other
than rice, to the diet. For this reason I have chosen a tropical region with a
long history of food technology, and that is, an area with “millennia of history
of fungi, food and fermentation” to quote the title of Hesseltine’s classical
review of the subject3.
   In Indonesia, at the heart of the region, fermented cakes of soya beans and
groundnut provide about one-third of the total crude protein requirement of
the population and these fermentation processes have been particularly
studied in our laboratory because they can be applied to fermenting low-
protein agricultural products to synthesize microbial protein in situ with
added mineral nitrogen and other salts4.
   Mushrooms, although a very common constituent of the South-east Asian
diets, contribute a small proportion of the protein, and recent studies of the
Basidiomycetes have shown that it would not be possible to meet the whole of
the human protein requirement from the culture of this type of organism
even by modern industrial methods. Nevertheless, the Dutch have recently
considered it worthwhile to investigate the growing of the classical mush¬
room of South-east Asia, the paddy-straw mushroom (Volvaria species)5 as
part of the diversification of their industrialized food economy. The Basidio-
                  C “O   <D
                  £ o _c
                  ° o tr
                  U LL O




;E
•c
<
T3
0)Q>
CO


 CO
O)
TO>
<D

            CD
            c

            <DO
            O



 CO

 E
 0)
 +->
CO

 w)
 0)
x>
,D



 O
 O
cc


 oD
*D
  O
 (T3
D
 CD
2                    o c ,9>




       03
       .o
       03
       •w
       03
       Q
466     Pan IV       Plants    stanton


mycetes, of which Volvaria is a member are, however, a particularly interesting
 group of fungi in that they are the most important group which can
 exploit cellulose as their carbon source of growth. The other main method
 of utilizing cellulose has been via the ruminant, but the organisms in the
rumen require an extremely specialized environment which it is difficult to
simulate even under the most advanced laboratory conditions.
   The paddy-straw mushroom can be regarded as a truly “domesticated”
plant, although it appeared originally as a growth on the threshing and milling
trash of the rice mill. Attempts have been made in recent years to select this
organism and improve the growing conditions6. As always happens with
increased domesticity it seems that troubles are beginning to arise from a new
series of pathogens—fungi, bacteria and viruses. These diseases are already
the common experience of the mushroom growers of the temperate zones.
   In following the path of domestication of higher plants, we are able to
observe the interaction and the response of the plant to methods of harvesting,
selection for increased size of the useful part, selection for palatability, yield,
etc. It is also possible to trace the spread of lower domesticated plants along
with the spread of the appropriate human culture.
   For the food technologies and the micro-organisms associated with them,
however, the documentation and research is less complete than for the higher
plant and animals. The organisms, examples of which I have already men¬
tioned and which I have classified in Table i, are truly domesticated and differ
from their wild relatives in a number of respects. The changes which have
occurred must be observed in controlled culture studies, for which one can

Algae                  Fungi                       Yeasts              Bacteria

Marine                 Basidiomycetes              Saccharomyces sp.   Acetobacterl'a’b'>
 Chondrus crispus      e.g. Volvaria^’6>           S. cerevisiae^'h)   Bacillus subtilista'b'>
 Porphyra sp. <“>           Amanita sp.            S’. rouxiila’b'>    Lactobacillus(0’6)
 Others*e>                  Hallucinogenic fungi                       Corynebacterium
                            Various “wood”         Hansenula sp.<">    fish sauce organisms
Lacustrine                    fungi<“>
  Spirulina sp.        Others*1*)
  Chlorella sp.<c>          Aspergillus^’b>
                            Monascus^a)
                            MoniliaW
                            Mucor
                            Penicillium
                            Rhizopus(-a'b'>
                            Thamnidium


(a) Indigenous to South-east Asian food technology.
(b) Known to have undergone extensive selection.
(c) Japan mainly.
(4) See also Hesseltine, C. W., Wang, Hwa, L. and Smith, M. (1967). Traditional fermented
    foods, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 9 (3), pp. 275-88.
(e) Subba Rao, G. N. (1965). Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council Regional Studies. No. 2. Use of
    seaweeds directly as human food, Bankok; F.A.O. Regional Office for Asia and the Far
    East, p. 32.

Table 1 Examples of “cultivated” micro-organisms.
                       Lower plants in South-east Asian food technology     467

use the equivalent of the Clausen transplant-experiment technique7, studies
of growth rate, interaction with substrate, biochemical pathways, and the
biochemistry and organoleptic character of the end products. Taste is still an
important aid to the selection of the organisms involved in the fermentation
in spite of all the refinements of analytical chemistry.
   The end-product of the micro-organic culture consists of the micro¬
organism mass itself such as the sporophores of Basidiomycetous fungi, and
the algae8, including seaweed. Even bacteria such as the Acetobacter sp. are
stimulated to form a jelly-like mass on fruit juice and coconut water in a
Philippine fermentation process to produce Nata. Alternatively, a mixture of
the original material with mycelium threads of fungi such as Rhizopus, Mucor
and other species may be produced9, or a more complex fermentation may
occur such as is used in the manufacture of miso, a fermented soya bean paste
of Japan10, in which a number of organisms have taken part at different stages.
This particular paste is of interest in that three-quarters of the households in
Japan use this fermented product as a main soup component daily, according
to a recent survey report. The Japanese products represent a northward and
eastward migration of the “sho” processes (a general term in Japan for the
high salt fermentations). Today these fermentations are carried out under
highly industrialized conditions, the organisms being given the benefit of
highly specialized environments, and the domestication in consequence has
proceeded here further than it has elsewhere in the region. Further, due to the
extensive Japanese investigations of these industrialized organisms and their
associated production methods, more is known about the variation in charac¬
ter between different strains in Japan than in other parts of the region.
Japanese, American, Indonesian and our own study of the organisms used in
the village-factory and domestic economies in the south and east of the
region show that these food micro-organisms, which are conserved from one
process batch to the next, differ considerably in many characters from their
wild counterparts.
   The types of variation which we found in different isolates in response to
different substrates and controlled conditions are shown in Table 2.
   I feel that we are on the verge of a large development in domestication of
these organisms, in order to make a better use of the limited food resources of
the Tropical World, and we shall require all the modern techniques of
agronomy such as the statistical methods of response surfaces to achieve
optimum growing conditions, and plant breeding which has great possibilities
with micro-organisms, in order to achieve optimum results. We have however
the advantage with the cultivation of these lower plants that we can control
with relative ease the environment in which they are grown, and we can
employ specialized environments which will protect them in part from harm¬
ful elements of the rest of the biota, that is, from the effects of unwanted
micro-organisms such as those which produce mycotoxins and which are the
analogues of weeds in higher plant agriculture.
468    Part IV Plants        STANTON

General genetic and cytological stability: probably increases (true of brewing yeasts).
Growing rate: increased in the selected substrate, but decreased in comparison with “wild
  types” on the general range of substrates. Probable loss of capacity to overcome naturally
  occurring growth inhibitors.
Environmental adaptability: growth of cultivated strain inferior to wild type outside the range
  of conditions normally provided for the fermentation, e.g. temperature, humidity, salinity,
  oxygen, tension, nutrient concentration.
Reproductive capacity: selection for early and heavy sporulation under the processing condi¬
  tions employed.
Food acceptability: improved palatability and acceptability of end-product (selection against
  unacceptable metabolites).
Increased tolerance: to growth inhibiting factors occurring in the cultivation process, e.g.
  metal ions (Cu++, Zn++), specific glycosides, N03, urea, organic acids, phenolic compounds.
Contrived growth: in presence of its own metabolites; the loss of enzyme feed-back
  inhibitions.
Advanced industrial processes: strains with highly selected segments of biosynthetic pathways
  with removal of feed-back inhibitions.

Table 2     Examples of known and postulated changes in fungi due to selection
      under cultivation.


  Micro-organism cultures may be regarded as components of a two stage
phytosynthetic process and, apart from the disadvantage of an obligatory
requirement of non-solar energy, they have many advantages over higher
plant cultures in features such as short cultivation time, low demand on land
and fresh water (sea-water and saline water can be used) and simplicity of
mutual adjustment of organism to environment with consequent precise
control over the character of the synthetic product. Analysis of the classical
process impresses one with the degree of understanding which early tech¬
nologies achieved in harnessing the ferments.
   As with higher plants, it is pertinent to advance domestication initially
with the recognized food species of micro-organisms, though because we can
now create chemically and physically controlled environments not available
to earlier food technologists, we may be able to cultivate previously un¬
tamable species.



       Notes

        1 Duddington, C. L. (1967). Seaweeds and Other Algae. London, p. 207;
          Glabe, E. F., Goldman, P. F. and Anderson, P. W. (1957). How Irish
          moss extractive improves protein-content foods, Fd. Engng., 29 (1), pp.
          65-7j Larsen, B. A. and Hawkins, W. W. (1961). Nutritional value as
          protein of some of the nitrogenous constituents of Chondrus crispus and
          Laminaris digitata,J. Sci. Fd. Agric., 12, pp. 523-9; De Guerin, B. C.
          (1946). Carrageen in the Channel Isles, Fd. Mf., 21, pp. 95-8; Sieburth,
          J. McN. and Jensen, A. (1967). Effect of processing on the microflora
          of Norwegian seaweed meal with observations on Sporondonema minutum
          (Hpye), Frank and Hess, Appl. Microbiol., 15 (4), pp. 830-8.
        2 Etchells, J. L., Jones, I. D. and Lewis, W. M. (1947). Bacteriological
          changes during the fermentation of certain brind and salted vegetables,
          U.S.D.A. Technical Bull., 947, Oct. 1947.
                  Lower plants in South-east Asian food technology       469

 3 Hesseltine, C. W. (1965). A Millennium of fungi, food and fermenta¬
   tion, Mycologia, 57, pp. 149-97; Hesseltine, C. W., Wang, H. L. and
   Smith, M. (1967). Traditional Fermented Foods, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 9
   (3)» PP- 275-88.
 4 Annual Rep. Tropical Products Inst. (1967). H.M.S.O., London, p. 49.
 5 Chang, S. T. (1965). Cultivation of the straw mushroom in S.E. China,
   World Crops, 17 (3), pp. 47-9.
 6 Madic, V. R. and Roldan, E. F. (1965). A preliminary test on the effect on
   mushroom production of straws rendered sterile with fumigant dowfume
   MC-Z, AranetaJ. Agric., 12, pp. 233-8.
 7 Clausen, J., Keck, D. D., Hiesey, W. M. (1939). The concept of species
   based on experiments, Amer. J. Bot., 26 (2), pp. 103-6.
 8 Subba Rao, G. N. (1965). Use of seaweed directly as human food,Indo-
   Pacific Fisheries Council Regional Studies, 2, F.A.O. Regional Office for
   Asia and the Far East, Bangkok, p. 32.
 9 Hesseltine, C. W. et al. (1964). Tempeh: Nutritive value in relation to
   processing, Cereal Chem., 41 (3), pp. 173-81.
10 Standal, B. R. (1963). Nutritional value of proteins of oriental soyabeans’
   products, J. Nutr., 81 (3), p. 279 and p. 285.
       Section 2: Animals




       M. S. DROWER

       The domestication of the horse


The four main species of the genus Equus appear to have been distributed
over the forests and plains of the Old World during the Pleistocene period in
separate geographical zones: the onagers or half-asses (hemiones) in Hither
Asia (Arabia, Persia and India), the asses in northern and north-east Africa,
the zebras in the south and east of Africa and the caballine horses in Europe
and in Central Asia north of the great mountain ranges. All these species are
capable of producing hybrids, and all but the zebras have been domesticated
by man1.
   Of the species of Equus caballus, three wild races, all rather small, have
survived until fairly recently. These are Przewalski’s horse, a native of
Mongolia, of which a few specimens only are preserved in zoological gardens;
the tarpan, which became extinct in the middle of the nineteenth century
a.d. ; and the forest wild horse, which survived in Poland until the eighteenth
century. Whether the wild horses depicted in cave-paintings as the quarry of
hunters were all of one sub-species, or of several different strains, is in dis¬
pute; the existence of a much larger horse in palaeolithic times has been
postulated2. It appears at any rate certain that neither palaeolithic nor meso¬
lithic man domesticated the horse.



      First domestication
There is little evidence, written or archaeological, for the presence of the
domesticated horse in the Middle East until a little before 2000 b.c. Domesti¬
cation, necessarily a gradual process, must have been achieved earlier and
elsewhere. The distribution of the wild species suggests that horses were first
472   Part IV Animals     drower


tamed on the grass steppe-lands to the north, in the Ukraine or somewhere
further east, between Turkestan and China. The tamers are likely to have
been nomadic herdsmen to whom rapid mobility would have given many
advantages. It is however difficult to establish evidence for the early domesti¬
cation of the horse, since precise indications of morphological change, such
as are present in the skeletons of cattle and sheep3, are absent from the bones
of Equidae4. Bones of horses occur at all levels of the Tripolye culture of the
Ukraine, but become numerous only in the later phases; the sharp increase in
numbers in other sites contemporaneous with Tripolye B has been thought
to be evidence for domestication about 2700 or 2800 b.c.5 In the so-called
Timber Grave culture of the Volga region, ceremonial horse burials occur,
together with sacrifices of cattle, in a context of the middle of the second
millennium6.
   One or two isolated examples of bones formerly identified as E. caballus,
found in Persia in an early context at Sialk and Anau, are now generally
considered to be onagers7, and this is probably also true of the remains
found in Beersheba and dated to the fourth millennium b.c.8, though the
possibility cannot be ruled out that this was an early breed of wild horse
which later died out. Horses are not however depicted in prehistoric rock-
drawings in Palestine or Egypt9. The bone tablet from Susa which appears to
be a tally of domesticated equids with short bristle-manes must depict
onagers10.
   The first literary mention of the horse (in Sumerian ANSE KUR.RA)
occurs in a text of the Third Dynasty of Ur, c. 2100 b.c., in which the animal
is described as “of the (caravan) route” (i.e. not wild), and “with flowing
tail”; the latter epithet distinguishes it from the onager and assu. The word
ANSE.KUR means “foreign ass” or “ass of the mountains”; it is found in its
literal meaning in the Sumerian story of “Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta”,
in which asses of the mountain are used as beasts of burden (a purpose for
which the horse was not employed)12. Though horses are not mentioned in
the Code of Hammurabi and cannot therefore have been a domestic animal
frequently owned and used by Babylonians of the early eighteenth century
B.c., they make their appearance at about that time as costly and much-
desired objects of trade between the Amorite princes, Hammurabi’s near
contemporaries, whose correspondence is preserved in the Mari letters.
Carchemish on the Euphrates was one of the centres of distribution and
Kharsamma in Cappadocia was a source of supply13. Horses are several times
mentioned in the texts from Kanesh (modem Kiiltepe, near Kayseri) where
the form used is the Akkadian sisu, a word of undoubtedly Indo-European
origin (>aswas, ekwos)14, and although they do not receive mention in the
tablets from Alalakh of the eighteenth century b.c., they were known at the
same time in Brak and Chagar Bazar, on the river Khabut, where there are
models of equids, evidently horses, with painted or modelled bridles, and the
tablets mention “yokes” of horses: the quantities of fodder allowed for a yoke
                                            The domestication of the horse   473

show that two, or three (two and a spare), horses are meant15. For their role
was not to replace the ass as a pack animal, but to draw, yoked in pairs, the
light biga with spoked wheels which was now revolutionizing warfare.



      The horse and chariot of the Bronze Age

This mobile vehicle16, in build quite unlike the cumbersome solid-wheeled
Sumerian chariot drawn by onagers which it superseded17, is everywhere in
the Near East associated with the newcomers—Kassites, Hittites, Hurrians—
who during the early years of the second millennium b.c. were establishing
their rule over the kingdoms of Western Asia. Its use must have given tactical
superiority to the newcomers. In particular it is associated with the Indo-
Aryan aristocracies among the Hurrian and Kassites. Texts pertaining to the
art of horse-breeding use technical terms akin to Sanskrit, and the chivalry of
Mitanni and the Hurrian-dominated city-states of Syria and Palestine were
known by the Indo-Iranian name maryannu18. It may therefore be suggested
that mounted Aryans brought the horse south of the Caucasus, and that in
some well-wooded19 but not too rugged terrain, a new and more mobile form
of chariot was devised, perhaps by the Hurrians of the region who already
knew and used the heavier onager or ass-drawn vehicle20.
   The new technique spread rapidly: by the sixteenth century horses and
chariots were known and used in Greece and Egypt. The first European
horse is that depicted in the fifth shaft-grave at Mycenae, and the earliest
representations of horses in Egypt appear at the beginning of the eighteenth
dynasty, about 1570; they are mentioned in texts referring to the war of
liberation from the Hyksos a decade or so before, and the single horse whose
skeleton was found in the debris of the destroyed Middle Kingdom fortress
at Buhen21 may have been buried as early as the seventeenth century b.c.
Remains of horses have been found in India in contexts of the sixteenth
century and the horse and chariot reached China at least by 1300 B.C.22
   Technical treatises which have survived among the cuneiform tablets of the
Late Bronze Age show that in Anatolia23, North Syria24 and Mesopotamia25
the breeding, training and veterinary care of horses was well understood:
there are directions for exercising and grooming horses, stressing the im¬
portance of careful diet, and remedies for sick animals. At Ugarit what
appeared to be an indoor riding school26 was found. When sent from one
country to another, the animals needed to be acclimatized. In a letter to the
King of Babylonia27, a Hittite king asks for fresh supplies of horses, since
those which the former Kassite king had sent have gone lame: “In Hatti-land
the cold is severe, and an old horse does not last long. So send me, my brother,
young stallions!” Horses are listed at Alalakh and Nuzi according to sex, age
and colour; in Nuzi28, Hurrian words are used for the various colours, and in
the Kassite texts29 stallions are given names such as “Foxy”, “Starry”,
474   Fart IV Animals      drower

 “White”, “Piebald”. The name of the sire is often added (X., son of Y.),
 showing that pedigrees were remembered and perhaps stud-books kept.
 White horses were especially prized, in the Ancient Near East as among the
 Persians, Romans and Germans of a later age30; they were destined to draw
the chariots of kings and of gods and in Assyria were accorded divine
honours31.
   Ownership of horses and a chariot was a matter of rank and privilege. Only
kings and nobility are shown in the lightest type of vehicle, the mono¬
place chariot in which extraordinary skill and balance were needed. Looping
the reins round their waist, they let fly their arrows at a gallop after fleeing
targets, whether enemy soldiers or wild game. Ramesses III in the later New
Kingdom is shown in an open-fronted chariot with one foot on the chariot
pole, but this was unprecedented virtuosity (PI. ill). The breed was small, in
general not exceeding the dimensions of a pony: skeletal remains, and the
dimensions of the stables at Ugarit32, confirm the reliability of the artists in
this respect. It has often been remarked that horses are seldom shown being
ridden, and that in such representations (Fig i), the riders appear to be




Fig i Riding groom, from the tomb of Horemheb at Memphis, c. 1345 b.c.
      (after Aldred, C. (1951). New Kingdom Art in Ancient Egypt during the 18th
      dynasty B.C. London. Fig. 141.)


grooms or stable lads33. The explanation that they were too small to bear full-
grown men cannot be correct, for donkeys were ridden; the reason may he
rather in the difficulty an inexperienced bareback rider without stirrups
would have in keeping his balance, and his dignity, on a short-striding animal
at the trot31. Nevertheless Astarte, the Syrian goddess who protected
charioteers, is herself shown riding bareback35, and it may be suspected that
there were larger breeds which were more suitable for riding. The Buhen
horse was larger than a pony, and a horse found buried at Osmankayasi near
Boghazkoi30 was about fourteen and a half hands (150 cm.), the size of a
modern Arab, and able no doubt to pull the heavier, three-manned chariot of
the Hittites. For horses must have been bred for size as the weight of the
chariot increased. The armour-plating of chariots and horses and of their
                                           The domestication of the horse   475


riders, was no doubt made necessary by the spread of penetrating weapons
such as the composite bow; the sariam frequently mentioned in the Nuzi
texts (the word is probably Indo-Iranian) appears to have been a leather
jerkin or cover sewn with metal scales37.

       The Iron Age

By 1000 b.c. new and larger breeds of horse were making their appearance
and superior harness had evolved. A second wave of Indo-European immigra¬
tion brought horse riders to the Iranian highlands. To Azerbaijan and to
Gilan and Mazanderan on the well-watered southern shore of the Caspian
Sea came the Mannaeans and the Medes, and Iran soon became the land of
“fine horses and fine men”. Horses figure largely in the animal style of
Luristan and bronze cheek-pieces, horse-bits and other harness elements are
the most common objects found38. Pottery models show saddles. The horses
the newcomers rode were relatively big: horse-bones from Hasanlu in
Azerbaijan (Early Iron Age) examined by Bokonyi were those of animals
about 140 cm. in height39 and those found in early Scythian graves at Szentes-
Vekerzug in Hungary studied by him were of a similar size40. Zamua and the
Mannai territories south of Lake Urmia were sources whence the Assyrians
obtained fresh supplies of horses, and from the ninth century onwards
mounted cavalry formed an essential part of the Assyrian fighting force. At
the same time, according to the palace reliefs, the chariot was getting heavier
and larger; so, too, were the horses that drew it (Fig. 2).




Fig 2a War chariot: relief from the palace of Ashur-nasir-pal, ninth
     century b.c.
     (after Layard, A. H. (1849). Nineveh and its Remains, 2. London, p. 350).


   According to Hilzheimer41 several breeds of horse are represented in these
reliefs, but he probably puts too much reliance on the accuracy of the
draughtsman; similarly, Ghirshman’s attempt to deduce from the painted
pottery horses from Susa and Makou the existence of two distinct breeds42 is
unwarranted. There is however good evidence for the coexistence of two
476   Part IV Animals    drower




Fig 2b Ashur-bani-pal’s state chariot, seventh century b.c.
     (after Layard, A. H. (1849). Nineveh audits Remains, 2. London, p. 137).

races of horse in the remarkably-preserved burials of the fifth century b.c. at
Pazyryk43: in each kurgan a number of short-headed ponies were found,
which Professor Vitt considered to have been descended from a wild
Mongolian stock of Przewalski descent, and also at least one thoroughbred
horse of greater stature (over 140 cm.); these were all geldings and had been
fed on corn and carefully tended, and they wore fine trappings. It is suggested
that the larger animals, which were similar in size and build to those from
Szentes, mentioned above44, may be descended from tarpan stock. Antonius
also classes Scythian horses as descendants of tarpans, basing his theory
largely on the horses depicted on the Chertomlyk vase45.
   Archaeology and the testimony of Herodotus (Bk. VII) have told us much
about the Scythians, and it is in this remarkable people that the fullest
development of a pastoral economy in which the horse played a leading part
may be pictured. They rode and shot with skill; they ate salted horse flesh
and drank fermented mare’s milk. In the barrows of South Russia the whole¬
sale sacrifice of horses described by Herodotus can be vividly reconstructed46.
It may be that the way of life of these nomads reflects the original symbiosis
of man and horse, developed on the steppe-lands perhaps two thousand years
earlier.



      The Western horse

It is not possible to discuss here the vexed question of the horses depicted in
the rock-engravings of North Africa, nor is the present writer competent to
do so. The date of the drawings, of which some thousands survive, has been
much discussed and there have been various attempts to classify them.
Henri Lhote in his studies of the Tassili group47 distinguishes a “che valine
period” in which horses are shown in pairs drawing a light-wheeled chariot,
in the attitude of the “flying gallop”; in these he sees similarities with
                                              The domestication of the horse   477


Mycenaean art and he suggests that the Sea Peoples, after the failure of their
attacks on Egypt, moved westwards with their Libyan allies and penetrated
the Fezzan, bringing with them the horse and chariot. Another theory would
associate the Tassili charioteers with the Garamantes and other tribes known
to the Romans. Neither takes account of the theory, discussed by Zeuner48,
that there may have been a separate western centre of domestication in Spain
or North Africa which gave rise to the North African “barb” or Barbary
horse. Here too there seems to be much scope for further enquiry. Whatever
the truth may be, it seems certain that the idea of the domestication of the
horse, and of harnessing it to a wheeled vehicle, must have reached the
Western Mediterranean from the Levant.


      Notes
       1 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
       2 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. p. 306.
       3 See Bokonyi, S. and Grigson, C., this volume, pp. 219-46 and 277-306.
       4 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. p. 316.
       5 Dr. S. Bokonyi’s dating (in discussion).
       6 Clark, G. and Piggott, S. (1967). Prehistoric Societies. London, p. 275.
       7 See Noble, D. S., this volume, pp. 485-8.
       8 Anati, E. (1963). Palestine before the Hebrews. London, p. 241.
       9 Anati, E. (1963). op. cit. p. 208; Winkler, H. (1938-9). Rock Drawings of
         Southern Upper Egypt. E.E.S. Archaeological Survey.
      10 Amiet, P. (1966). Elam. Anvers-sur-Oise. p. 97.                 v
      11 Falkenstein, A. (1952). Sumerische religiose Texte 2: Ein Sulgi-Lied,
         Z. Assyriologie, 16, pp. 64 ff.
      12 Salonen, A. (1956). Hippologica Accadica, Annales Academiae Scientiarum
         Eennicae. Sarja. Ser. B. Nide. 100. Helsinki, p. 19.
      13 Salonen, A. (1956). op. cit. p. 23; Dossin, R. (1938). Aplahanda, Roi de
         Carkemis, Rev. d’Assyriol., 35, p. 120.
      14 Salonen, A. (1956). op. cit. p. 21.
      15 Gadd, C. J. (1940). Tablets from Chagar Bazar and Tell Brak, Iraq, 7,
         pp. 22 ff.
      16 Yadin, Y. (1963). The Art of Warfare in Biblical Lands. London, pp. 86 ff.
      17 See Noble, D. S., this volume, ibid.
      18 O’Callaghan, R. T. (1948). Aram Naharaim, Analecta Orientalia, 26, pp.
         64 ff.
      19 The chariot preserved in Florence is built of oak and elm and has tyres
         of birch-bark ... all northern woods.
      20 Crossland, R. A. (1967). Immigrants from the North, C.A.H.IP, Cam¬
         bridge, ch. 27.
      21 Emery, W. B. (i960). A preliminary report on the excavations of the
         Egypt Exploration Society at Buhen, 1958-9, Kush, 8, pp. 7 ff.
      22 Dewall, M. von. (1964). Pferd und Wagen im friihen China, Saarbriicker
         Beitrage zur Altertumskunde, I, pp. 109 ff.
      23 Kammenhuber, A. (1961). Hippologia Hethitica. Wiesbaden.
      24 Virolleaud, Ch. (1934). Fragments d’un traite phenicien de therapeutique
         hippologique, Syria, 15, pp. 75 ff.
      25 Ebeling, E. (1951). Bruchstucke einer mittelassyrischen Vorschriftensam-
         lung fur die Akklimatisation und Trainierung von Wagenpferden,
          Deutsche Akad. d. Wiss., Inst.f. Orientforschung, 7.
478    Part IV Animals      drower

       26 Schaeffer, C. F. A. (1938). Les fouilles de Ras Shamra-Ugarit: neuvieme
           campagne (printemps 1937), Syria, 19, p. 314.
       27 See Salonen, A. (1956). op. cit. p. 28 for references.
       28 Pfeiffer, R. and Speiser, E. A. (1936). One hundred new selected Nuzi
           texts, Ann. Am. Sch. Or. Research, 16.
      29 Balkan, K. (1954). Kassitenstudien I, Die Sprache der Kassiten, Amer. Or.
           Series, 37, pp. 11-40 and pp. 127 f.
