Part II: Methods of investigation
      Section i: Domestication and exploitation of plants




     J. ALEXANDER

      The indirect evidence for domestication

Botanists, zoologists and archaeologists interested in the problems of domesti¬
cation have naturally been concerned with the “direct” evidence, which may
be “cultural” or “non-cultural”. Direct cultural evidence is precise literary
references, drawings, paintings and carvings, specialized tools, and cultiva¬
tion systems. Indirect cultural evidence includes the actual remains of plant
cultigens preserved by carbonization, matrix impressions, silica skeletons,
and the bones, teeth, horns or antlers of animals. Unfortunately, some
archaeologists have accepted a number of other cultural traits associated with
early farming communities in Europe, Western Asia and Northern Africa as
diagnostic of the beginnings of domestication, when these are, at best, only
“indirect” evidence and of very limited value; “indirect” non-cultural
evidence from botany and zoology has been little considered. It may be of
use to examine here the restrictions which should be placed on some kinds of
cultural interpretation and the increasing importance which should be
attached to the non-cultural. Before doing this the central role of the field
archaeologist in solving these problems may be stressed. Evidence of any
kind can only come from carefully excavated and well-dated sites, and whilst
the techniques of excavation may be learnt by botanists and zoologists who
are prepared to serve a full archaeological apprenticeship, the evidence will
not be obtained without it. For the foreseeable future, progress must be by
teams of workers led by archaeologists.
   The indirect cultural evidence comprises most of the material found in
excavations, for it takes its final proof of being connected with farmers or
pastoralists, from non-cultural evidence. How unreliable is indirect cultural
evidence has been made clear by ethnology, which has been too little re¬
garded by prehistorians. Cultural evidence has been overemphasized in the
124   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     ALEXANDER


past because of the historical accident that much of the early work has been
done in Western Europe—where the cultural evidence has special
validity. This region received its knowledge of farming from outside and its
first farmers possessed skills, in particular those of making pottery and
ground-stone tools, which were the product of millennia of development
elsewhere. It was these skills which enabled them to be identified and they
were in fact isolated culturally before it was certain that they were farmers.
When criteria established in Western Europe are applied to other parts of the
world the results can be unfortunate.
   With the exception of Australia, some husbandry of indigenous plants and
animals existed in all continents in the historic present (sixteenth century
a.d.). The range and variation in methods of cultivation and equipment was
very wide and by analogy, any attempt by prehistorians to take a particular
cultural trait out of its local setting and to infer a relationship between it and
any particular plant or animal domestication is unsound.
   Examples of some of the more striking points still often disregarded by
archaeologists may be listed.

      Societies without domesticated plants or animals who use:


1 Digging sticks; America1, Australia2, Asia3, Africa4.
2 Grinding stones; America5, Australia6, Asia7.
3 Ground stone tools; Australia8.
4 Irrigation including dams and channels, and fences for wild plants;
  America9.
5 Pottery; Asia10, America11, Africa12.
6 Storage pits13, metal14, long-settled villages, elaborate social organizations
  and substantial houses, all in North America15.


      Societies with domestic plants and animals who lack the following:


1 Ground stone tools or any other farming equipment leaving durable
  evidence; America16.
2 Pottery; in the Pacific17.
3 Grinding stones; Africa18.

   This suggests that the most cultural traits should be considered only as
part of larger complexes of facts. In detail these may be discussed under the
following headings:
   i Clearing the land. This will be necessary in most parts of the world and
may need tools different from those used by hunter /gatherers. These may not
be specialized enough to be direct evidence of clearance (indeed no tools at all
may be used) but the heavy component of late glacial and early post-glacial
lithic industries should be studied with this use in mind. The apparent
                                     The indirect evidence for domestication   125


 abandonment in West Africa of many of the clearing tools when the work was
 finished19 is interesting, for it might lead to identifying clearing systems here
 and elsewhere. The signs of wear on stone tools should also be considered
 with this use in mind20.
    2 Preparation of the land, planting or sowing. This will usually be done
 with such tools as digging sticks, hoes, rakes and ploughs. Only in the case of
 the plough are these specialized enough to be precisely linked with full
 agriculture, and digging sticks will always be particularly difficult to assess21.
 Stone, bone, antler or wooden hoes, are on ethnographic evidence, rarely used
 for planting22 although widely used for mounding-up. It seems possible that a
 limited role should be accepted for many of those found in excavation.
     Sowing as opposed to planting and the relationship of this to cultivation
 techniques might be suggested by a study of these tools.
    3 Harvesting. The variety of reaping methods known from ethnography
 includes many which leave no durable evidence23. Some of these methods are
 also used by gatherers and this makes durable harvesting tools difficult to
 assess.
    Reaping knives and sickles, unless a study of the wear on them gives
 precise evidence24, are relatively valueless, unless supported by non-cultural
evidence.
    4 Processing and storing. Many crops need treatment if they are to be kept,
and if grown in quantity, need special stores. It is possible in the excavation
of settlements that features connected with these processes will be identified,
and since quite elaborate ones are, as has been mentioned25 used by gatherers,
they may belong to incipient as well as long established agricultural societies.
 Seed-crops may need threshing and winnowing floors, drying racks or ovens;
roots, tubers and rhizomes may need graters, squeezers or heating bowls.
None of these will be conclusive without non-cultural evidence. Storage may
leave good archaeological evidence as clamps and pits or above ground stacks
or stores. The special designs of these may be recognizable in plan and con¬
struction in well-established agricultural/vegecultural societies but in initial
ones will need the support of non-cultural evidence.
    In this context Forde’s observation that storage in the tropics is largely
unnecessary except where large accumulations are needed for social purposes26
is interesting.
   5 Cooking and preparation for eating. Grinding, pounding or grating is
necessary for many food crops but since all these techniques are used by
gatherers, they cannot, of themselves, be indicative of domestic crops, or
even of food preparation. They are also used for preparing paints and poisons.
In cooking, much specialized equipment may be highly suggestive of particu¬
lar crops; for example interior-heated ovens in wheat and barley growing
areas or baking plates in manioc growing ones. Only in association with non-
cultural evidence are they conclusive.
   6 Evidence of animal keeping. Durable equipment seems less common.
126   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   ALEXANDER


from ethnographic parallels, for animal-keeping than for agriculture and a
wider range of motives seems to lead to their being kept. Evidence from the
form of containers (milk or cheese holders) is of course unreliable without
non-cultural evidence27. In some societies byres and corrals may be recog¬
nized with the help of other kinds of non-cultural evidence.
   The indirect non-cultural evidence has been much less considered than the
direct. This is unfortunate for it is probably from it, and not from the
cultural evidence that the beginnings of domestication in most areas will be
recognized. Hope of future advance lies in the increasing interest being shown
by natural scientists. With their help, an increasingly wide range of research
techniques may be tried on each new final-glacial or early post-glacial site as
it is discovered. The field archaeologist must have discussed the theoretical
possibilities of applying specialized knowledge and techniques from many
disciplines before excavation begins. This will mean a kind of collaboration
very different from the rather formal post-excavation one which has usually
taken place in the past. Only when the relationships are intimate and dis¬
cussion is wide ranging will the possible uses of highly specialized techniques
be realized28. Some of the more oblique evidence so far recovered may be
considered as examples.
    In the botanical sciences two kinds of indirect evidence may be instanced.
Any disturbance of a natural vegetation cover will provide growth oppor¬
tunities for plants not normally dominant. In agricultural clearings, selective
weeding may further favour particular small or low-growing plants. This
phenomenon has been much studied and complexes of weeds in fields of
 different crops in all parts of the world29 are well known. Their occurrence
in excavated pollen spectra or, particularly, in macroscopic collections,
 might sometimes indicate not only cultivation but even the kind of crops
 being grown. The possibility of recognizing regularly cropped pasture by its
 selective weeds must be considered30.
    Refinements in sampling techniques for pollen study have meant that thin
 successive, even annual strata of deposition, can be recognized and sampled.
 These may reveal very local and temporary disturbances in a vegetation cover,
 and in conjunction with domestic plant and weed pollens can identify human
 interference with it for agriculture31. Alternatively, variations in the pro¬
 portional representation of plants in the natural spectrum may be attributable
 to man.
    Much of what has just been said for plants is true for molluscs. Molluscan
 evidence can be used either as complementary to the botanical or, in its
 absence, as an alternative to it32. Disturbances in a vegetation cover will
 profoundly alter the molluscan spectrum and make the change recognizable
 in stratified deposits. Species favouring cultivated fields or even particular
 crops33 may also be distinguishable. The presence of other species may also
 indicate the presence of animals. The possibilities of the study of specialized
 molluscan pests needs much further attention by archaeologists.
                                    The indirect evidence for domestication   127


  Entomological evidence must become of increasing importance in the
future34. Many insects are even more limited in their tolerance of vegetation
change than molluscs, and also more selective in their feeding habits35.
Identifiable fragments of insects, mainly cuticles and legs, occur in sites of all
ages36 and in a variety of wet, dry, acid and non-acid conditions. From the
evidence of insect pests, the kind of crops being grown or the kind of animals
being kept, may be identifiable, as may be buildings used as stores (for
example, as cereal granaries) or byres (for sheep, goats or cattle).
   Parasitology may also play a much greater part in identifying farming in the
future. The survival of parasites either as eggs37, or spores38, is now well
attested and since parasites such as Nematodes are usually highly selective in
their hosts, they might well help to give some indication of the crops or
animals present.
   Zoology can provide an indirect evidence of plant agriculture by showing
the presence of vertebrate pests; concentrations of rodent bones for example
may indicate cereal granaries. Indirect zoological evidence of animal
husbandry has been much considered in recent years and it may be that too
much attention has been paid to it in considering the beginnings of domestica¬
tion39. The ageing and sexing of excavated animal populations has been much
developed but much less is known of the difference between tame and wild
herds, or of the exploitation of the latter by hunting societies40. The effects of
castration upon bone and other tissues may well be of more use in the future
distinguishing early or intermediate stages of domestication41.
   One kind of indirect geological evidence may be cited here. The human
clearance of hillsides in regions of torrential rain can quickly lead to sheet
erosion, and this in association with other kinds of evidence, could indicate
farming42.
   In conclusion it may be suggested that attention has perhaps been too much
concentrated upon a looking-backwards from established farming com¬
munities in attempts to see traits present in them in their ancestral societies43.
An analogy might be made with some of the earlier approaches of physical
anthropology to the problems of human evolution. If more attention was paid
to late glacial and immediately post-glacial societies, using the methods of
study suggested by ethnography, and implementing them by the techniques
of a number of natural science disciplines, the balance might be restored.




      Notes
      1 Paiute (Great Basin): Forde, C. D. (1964). Habitat, Economy and Society.
        London.
      2 Bindibu (Central West Australia): Thomson, D. F. (1964). Some wood
        and stone implements of the Bindibu tribe of Central West Australia,
        Proc. Prehist. Soc., 30, pp. 404-8.
128   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants         ALEXANDER


       3 Veddas (Ceylon): Allchin, B. (1966). The Stone Tipped Arrow. London,
         p. 128.
       4 Bushmen and others.
       5 Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
       6 Thomson, D. F. (1964). op. cit.
       7 Allchin, B. (1966). op. cit.
       8 Warramunga (Central Australia): Spencer, B. and Gillen, F. (1913).
         Across Australia. London, p. 368.
       9 Paiute: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid; Kwakiutl (British Columbia): Forde,
         C. D. (1964). ibid.
      10 Andaman Islanders: Radcliffe-Browne, A. R. (1964). The Andaman
         Islanders. London; Veddas: Allchin, B. (1966). op. cit.
      11 Yokut (Great Basin): Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      12 Bushmen and others.
      13 Paiute: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      14 North-west Coast tribes generally: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      15 Olson, R. (1927). Adze, Canoe and House Types of the North West Coast.
         Washington.
      16 Hopi (Arizona): Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      17 South Solomon Islanders: Forde, C. D. (1964). ibid.
      18 Ambo (Zambia): Stefaniszin, B. (1964). The Ambo. Livingstone; and
         Sub-Saharan Africa generally.
      19 Davies, O. (1958). West Africa, COW A Area Report, 2, p. 1.
      20 As suggested by Dr. Ruth Tringham.
      21 For example, hoes among the Chenchu (South India): Allchin, B. (1966).
         op. cit. p. hi. Weights, unless found on digging sticks, are unreliable
         evidence since similar objects have other uses, e.g. loomweights, mace
         heads, net sinkers.
      22 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit., p. 379.
      23 For example, beaters and baskets.
      24 As suggested by Dr. Ruth Tringham.
      25 Paiute: Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit.
      26 Forde, C. D. (1964). op. cit., p. 380.
      27 The recent identification of polypeptic acids in pot sherds may be of
         significance here.
      28 For example, the recent identification of polypeptic acids in pot sherds.
      29 Salisbury, Sir E. (1961). Weeds and Aliens. London. Thirty-nine families of
         weeds in wheatfields and fourteen in temperate grassland are listed.
      30 The same kind of identification is possible in the tropics, see Adams, L.
         and Baker, J. (1962). Weeds of the cultivated and grazing lands of Ghana,
         in Wills, W. (ed.) Agriculture and Land Use in Ghana.
      31 Dimbleby, G. W. (1967). Plants and Archaeology. London, p. 148.
      32 Evans, J. Molluscs in chalk soils, Unpublished paper presented to the
         Research Seminar in Archaeology and Related Subjects, 1967.
      33 For example, the East African “Banana” snail.
      34 Sparks, B. (1963). Non-marine mollusca and archaeology, in Brothwell,
         D. R. and Higgs, E. (eds.) Science and Archaeology. London.
      35 For example, “Yam” beetles (Heteroligus sp. and Prionoryctes sp.) or
         Aspidoproctus. Jerath, M. (1965). Yam pests and their known parasites
         and predators in Nigeria, Nig. Dept, of Agric. Research, Memo. 83.
      36 From Inter-glacial deposits onwards.
      37 Pike, A. and Biddle, M. (1966). Parasite eggs in mediaeval Winchester,
         Antiquity, 40, p. 293.
      38 Levy, J. (1958). Vegetable complex of Coffin, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 23, p. 162.
      39 Herre, W. (1963). The science and history of domestic animals, in
         Brothwell, D. R. and Higgs, E. ibid.
                              The indirect evidence for domestication    129


40 Detailed surveys of large collections of wild animal bones, as for example
   at Solutre or Mount Carmel, need to be undertaken.
41 For example, the recent identification of castrated reindeer from antler
   tissue.
42 As perhaps at Nok; Fagg, B. A. B. (1959). The Nok culture in prehistory,
   J. Niger. Hist. Soc., 1.
43 See the use of the term “neolithic” in Central Asia; Mongait, L. (1958).
    Archaeology in the U.S.S.R. London.
      D. M. DIXON

      A note on cereals in ancient Egypt


This paper is confined to noting briefly some of the evidence on cereals in
ancient Egypt down to the Ptolemaic period. This is considered, somewhat
arbitrarily perhaps, under two headings, Direct and Indirect evidence. Under
the former is included the archaeological-botanical and artistic evidence and
under the latter the textual evidence. Limitations of space have precluded
discussion of such matters as ancient Egyptian agricultural implements,
granaries, etc., and no attempt is made to discuss the origins of the various
species, or the route(s) by which they may have entered Egypt1.



      Direct evidence
The staple wheat species of Egypt was emmer, Triticum dicoccum. Indeed,
until fairly recently it was the only species of wheat reported from Egypt from
neolithic times down to the Ptolemaic period. All finds of emmer wheat
known up to 1940 have been listed, with references by V. and G. Tack-
holm2. According to Percival3, fragments of wood and ivory carvings (natural
size) of cereal spikes found in the tomb of Djer at Abydos probably represent
emmer rather than barley, as stated by Petrie4.
   Spelt, T. spelta, which is frequently mentioned in discussions of Egyptian
wheat, and often appears in translations of Egyptian texts, has never been
found in Egyptian grain deposits.
   In 1948 the top of an uncarbonized spike of wheat was found in a grave at
the neolithic site of El-Omari. In Debono’s preliminary report on the ex¬
cavations5, Mrs. Tackholm refers to this specimen as Triticum monococcum,
einkom, and elsewhere6 she states “When I saw this ear, I got the impression
that what we had here was quite another type of wheat, not met with earlier at
the excavations, viz. T. monococcum L.” The spike was subsequently sub¬
mitted to E. Schiemann, E. Tschermak, and H. Kihara, all of whom agreed
that it was T. monococcum,1. In 1951 Tackholm published8 the results of her
examination of the plant material discovered by Firth in 1927 in rooms
opening off an underground gallery near the north enclosure wall of the Step
132   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   DIXON


Pyramid complex at Saqqara. The bulk of this material consisted of “ex¬
tremely well preserved” wheat and barley, including complete spikes of both
cereals. Among these, Tackholm encountered “once more the type of T.
monococcum. As a matter of fact, a detailed investigation of the material
proved to me that a fair portion of the material consisted of T. monococcum.
Again, another cereal find from Icheti’s tomb, Saqqara, from the Vlth
Dynasty, excavated by J.-P. Lauer also seems to be T. monococcum9.”
   Samples from the Step Pyramid galleries were submitted to Aberg, who
stated in his report10 that a detailed study of the “two markedly different
types” of wheat specimens sent to him “clearly showed that two species were
represented, namely Triticum monococcum L. and Triticum dicoccum Schiibl.”.
After describing the characters of the wheat identified as T. monococcum,
Aberg remarks that it “seems to be rather closely related to the variety which
Percival (1921) described as var. vulgare Kcke.”. He concludes with the
words “At the present time there is therefore no doubt but what the ancient
Egyptians knew about Triticum monococcum and even used it for cultivation11”.
   The grain discovered during the excavation of Icheti’s tomb at Saqqara
was examined by Helbaek12. The material submitted to him consisted of two
whole spikes and twenty-six major portions of such. Helbaek remarks that
“On the whole it must be admitted that these spikes, to a superficial observa¬
tion, are extremely deceptive and, so far as size is concerned, suggestive of
Einkorn. This impression does not, however, stand up to a close morpho¬
logical scutiny13.” After close examination and comparison, he concluded that
the alleged einkorn among the Icheti wheat was emmer, T. dicoccum. “In
spite of a certain dimensional conformity with recent einkorn, the morpho¬
logical discrepancies are too great for referring any part of the find to this
species14.”
   In the light of his examination of the Icheti wheat, Helbaek went on to
suggest that the einkorn from the Zoser galleries was also emmer, and cast
doubt on the identification of the Omari specimen as einkorn15. These doubts
were later confirmed when he examined (1955) the Zoser material and the
Omari spike. His view, therefore, is that “no valid evidence for the presence
of einkorn in Egypt has so far been offered16”.
   Authenticated finds of any species of naked wheat prior to the Graeco-
Roman period are extremely rare, and most authorities are now inclined to
regard only finds from that period as certainly identified naked wheats. A
number of finds of naked wheat have from time to time been reported17, but
most of them have proved on further examination to be threshed emmer.
   Among the material obtained from two of the Fayum neolithic granary
pits excavated by Caton-Thompson were some charred grains which Percival
(alone of the three cereal specialists who examined them) identified as
 Triticum vulgare (i.e. T. aestivum), bread wheat18. These determinations were
greeted with some scepticism, and subsequently Percival modified his
opinion. He stated19 that the straw from which the lining of the pits was
                                       A note on cereals in ancient Egypt    133


derived came from a wheat, and that although it was not possible to be quite
certain of the kind, “it is unlike any form of Emmer and resembles the straw
of Bread wheat”. Kew, however, reported that the particular wheat from
which the straw lining was derived could not be identified. Of the carbonized
grains Percival says they were “naked grains of a kind of wheat” and that “in
general form and size” they “resemble grains of some forms of Bread wheat,
but in some points they differ slightly from modern Bread wheats”. Among
the material he examined were “one or two spikelets with chaff resembling
that of emmer, and containing carbonized, blunt-ended grains somewhat like
those of T. vulgare; the significance of these finds I cannot appraise”. Percival
did “not feel justified in naming these carbonized grains as grains of T. vulgare
with certainty”. “I . . . hesitate to commit myself to the naming of these
(i.e. the straw and carbonized grain) as undoubtedly specimens of T. vulgare.”
   It certainly seems very unlikely that the Fayum Neolithic people were
growing bread wheat, which was apparently unknown to the neolithic people
at Merimde, the vast bulk of the grain found at that site being emmer. Bread
wheat was likewise unknown in the predynastic period and in dynastic times—
notwithstanding Unger’s claim to have identified grains of a naked wheat,
which he termed T. vulgare var. antiquorum, in mud bricks from one of the
Dahshur pyramids and from the town ruins at Tell el-Maskhuta (Nineteenth
Dynasty).
   However, a few years ago evidence did come to light for the existence of
naked wheat in neolithic Egypt. At the middle and late neolithic sites of
Merimde-Beni Salame and El-Omari were found a number of carbonized
grains which were identified by Helbaek20 as club wheat, T. compactum, a
hexaploid naked wheat. “With their greater thickness, blunt and rounded
shape, and the steeply placed embryo”, they differed sharply from emmer
grains found at these sites; and Helbaek thinks that “for all the distortion
caused by the process of carbonization Emmer grains would not arrive at this
shape, and it seems justifiable to list Club wheat among the cultivated plants
of Neolithic Egypt21.”
   At both Merimde and El-Omari, however, the grains of club wheat formed
but a small proportion of the grain found, the bulk of it being emmer and
hulled barley. It seems, therefore, that “Club wheat was not intentionally
cultivated, but occurred as a stray occupant of the field. ... It was probably
brought to Egypt together with the other crop plants at the beginning of
agriculture, but since it is never encountered in deposits of later periods
previous to the Graeco-Roman epoch, it was obviously a race that did not
thrive in the local conditions obtaining there22.”
   Turning now to the dynastic period, it may be noted that Schulz23 con¬
sidered as certain the identification as naked wheat of grains of Twelfth
Dynasty date found by Schweinfurth at Dra Abu el-Naga, Thebes, and of
others from the tomb of Rahotep at Meir, also Twelfth Dynasty.
    Schiemann24 thought she recognized T. durum, macaroni wheat, a
134   Part H Domestication and exploitation of plants    DIXON


 tetraploid naked species, in material of Eighteenth Dynasty date from Deir
 el-Medineh, but owing to the smallness of the sample, the determination was
 only provisional.
    From Graeco-Roman times a number of certainly identified examples of
 T. durum are known25 and it is not until this period that the species can be
 considered as established in Egypt.
    Barley has been used as a foodstuff in Egypt since very early times. Exam¬
ination of the abdominal contents of a large number of bodies of predynastic
date from Naga ed-Der in Upper Egypt showed that almost every one con¬
tained husks of barley. Barley frequently occurs in tombs and settlements of all
periods, usually alongside emmer. The barley grown in Egypt anciently
seems to have been much the same as that grown at the present time.
   According to Jackson26, the material from the neolithic granary pits
excavated by Caton-Thompson in the Fayum consisted of a mixture of two-
rowed and six-rowed types of barley. Most finds of ancient Egyptian barley
fall within the group of four-rowed and six-rowed types. According to Mrs.
Tackholm, who lists all the finds of four- and six-rowed barley known up to
194027, the red, white, and black barleys mentioned in the Egyptian texts
were probably four-rowed forms.
   Reference has already been made to the wooden and ivory carvings of
cereal spikes found in the tomb of Djer at Abydos by Petrie, who described
them as representing “bearded barley”. As already noted, however, they
probably represent emmer wheat. An entire barley plant was found in the
coffin of Amenophis I at Dra Abu el-Naga.
   According to Tackholm, naked barley was known in ancient Egypt, the
oldest example being grains from the neolithic settlements in the Fayum
excavated by Caton-Thompson28. Neither chaff nor spikelets have been dis¬
covered, and consequently it has not been possible to determine to which of
the three known types of naked barley the grains belong, viz. Hordeum
distichum var. nudum, H. tetrastichum var. coeleste, or H. hexastichum var.
revelatum. Helbaek, however, says that naked barley does not occur in
ancient Egypt: “Many reports on Egyptian grain postulate the occurrence of
Naked barley in prehistoric and dynastic deposits. No documentation has ever
been published, and according to my experience, which includes examination
of many grain finds, the postulate is unfounded29.”
   Among the barley finds listed by Tackholm are a number of instances of
germinated barley. According to some, this was used for beer-making, but as
we shall see later, Nims thinks that malt may also have served as a primary
food in addition to being used in making beer. Others, however, think that the
barley was germinated exclusively for funerary rites. Loret30, for example,
describes a hollow pyramid model, now in the museum at Florence, con¬
taining germinated barley along with a picture of Osiris, and he points out
that the germination of the barley figured in the funeral rites of the month of
Khoiak in memory of Osiris’s death.
                                       A note on cereals in ancient Egypt   135


   During the Eighteenth Dynasty the objects known as “Osiris-beds” occur
in tombs. For example, in the so-called “Treasury” in the tomb of Tut‘an-
khamun was a “huge black oblong box containing a figure of Osiris swathed in
linen”. This “Osiris-bed” or “germinated figure of Osiris” consists of a
wooden frame moulded in the form of this deity, hollowed out, lined with
linen, filled with Nile silt, and planted with barley31. This was moistened, the
grain germinated, and the inanimate form became green and living—thus
symbolizing the resurrection of Osiris, and of course of the deceased. The life-
size effigy found in Tuffankhamun’s tomb was completely bandaged in the
same way as a mummy.
   Other examples of “Osiris-beds” with germinated barley are known: two
were found in the tomb of Yuya and Thuyu, measuring 1-63 m. and 173 m.
respectively in length32. Another specimen, 178 m. long and 68 cm. wide,
was found in the tomb of Mahirper at Thebes33. In the Cairo Museum is an
empty specimen from the tomb of Horemheb34, and in the Egyptian Museum
at Stockholm is a small “Osiris-bed”, of unknown date, dug in a brick about
25 cm. long and filled with germinated barley35.
   Possibly a necklace of germinated barley found by Maspero on the
mummy of Kent at Sheikh ‘Abd el Qurnah (Dyn. 20) also symbolized
resurrection36.
   Despite Unger’s claim37 to have recognized some ancient Egyptian repre¬
sentations as dura. Sorghum vulgare, this cereal has not been identified on the
monuments, not has its grain been found in a Pharaonic context. In the
Agricultural Museum in Cairo is a panicle of dura said to have been found at
Gebelein, but Mrs. Tackholm remarks on its rather fresh appearance38. In
the Botanical Museum at Berlin-Dahlem was a piece of culm labelled Sorghum
vulgare Pers. said to have come from the tomb of Nib-ari( ?), Valley of the
Kings, Thebes, Eighteenth Dynasty; no collector is indicated39. Unger40
states that dura stems were found together with papyrus at Saqqara and that
Rosellini found dura grains at Thebes, the latter of which were said to have
been determined by a Dr. Hannerd. Both records, however, are very dubious,
and the position at present therefore is that there is no evidence that dura was
cultivated in Pharaonic Egypt.
   Schweinfurth was probably correct in suggesting that it was not cultivated
in Egypt before the Roman-Byzantine period; and the only authentic ancient
instances of dura grain seem to be those found by de Garis Davies in the
Coptic Monastery of Cyriacus at Thebes, dating from the sixth to seventh
centuries a.d. These were determined by Schweinfurth41.
   Although Pennisetum typhoideum (pearl or bulrush millet), Setaria italica,
Panicum miliaceum (proso-millet, or broom corn millet), and Echinochloa
frumentacea all occur in Egypt at the present day, not one of them has been
identified among the ancient plant remains. A caryopis without seed found by
Unger in a mud-brick from the town-wall of El Kab42 probably belongs to a
Panicum species (the brick is said, though on what grounds is not clear, to be
6—DOPAA   *   *
136   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     DIXON


probably of Second Intermediate date), but apart from this, no species of
Panicum is known from ancient Egypt.
   The only species of Setaria so far reported from ancient times is S. verti-
cillata which occurs at the present day as a weed in gardens, cultivated ground,
and waste places. In the Museum at Kew is a well-preserved specimen of this
species with a complete panicle, which was found in a flower garland exca¬
vated by Petrie at El Lahun. According to Mrs. Tackholm it is probably
Twelfth Dynasty, though there is no date on the accompanying label43.
   The only species of Echinochloa known from ancient Egypt is E. colonum,
grains of which were identified by Netolitzky among the intestinal contents of
some predynastic bodies excavated by Reisner at Naga ed-Der44. Judging by
the quantity and purity of the grains, it is perhaps possible that at that time
the plant was cultivated locally as a cereal.
   It would appear reasonable to suppose that the rice-plant may have been
known to the inhabitants of the Lower Nile Valley, where suitable conditions
for its growth existed in the swamps of Upper Egypt and especially the
Delta.
   In 1752 Count de Caylus45, a member of the Academie des Belles-Lettres,
gave an account of a large bronze figure of Osiris in his possession. The
figure, he says, was coated with a thin layer of gilded plaster; intermixed with
the plaster as a binder, were rice stalks. De Caylus was not alone in his belief
that the straws came from the rice plant; some years earlier, in 1739, the
figure had also been examined by a M. de Bose, another Academician, who
arrived at the same conclusion.
   The present location of the statuette is unknown, nor is it possible to date it
very closely on the basis of de Caylus’s illustration. The base, and therefore
any inscription it may have borne, was missing. The piece could as well be
Saite or Ptolemaic.
   Daressy46 was inclined to accept the findings of the two eighteenth-century
savants; Tackholm, on the other hand, thinks the identification as rice very
unlikely47. Whatever the truth of the matter, apart from this one alleged case,
rice has not been found in connection with ancient Egypt. It does not occur
in the tombs and no representations have been recognized on the monuments.
It is not mentioned in the texts and its Coptic name is identical with and
clearly derived from the Arabic el arouz. It seems clear that rice was
not cultivated in Egypt until some time after the Arab conquest of the
country.
   However, this is not to say the Egyptians of Pharaonic times could not have
known of the rice plant or its grains; they may well have known about rice,
though from what source they might have derived their knowledge and
whether the rice was wild or cultivated would be a matter of conjecture. What
is clear, on present evidence, is that the plant was not cultivated in Pharaonic
Egypt. The explanation could be that by the time the Egyptians became
acquainted with rice, whenever that may have been, they had already been
                                       A note on cereals in ancient Egypt   137


growing wheat and barley for a long time and were perfectly satisfied with
these crops, which are in fact much more nutritious than rice, which has the
additional disadvantage that it cannot be made into flour.



      Indirect evidence
Linguistic evidence may often furnish information not supplied by the
archaeological material. A good example (though not a cereal) is the case of
the chick pea or Bengal gram (Cicer arietinum), which has been cultivated for
centuries in India, the Near East, and southern Europe. The archaeological
evidence for the cultivation of this species in ancient Egypt seems to be
extremely meagre48. Examination of the linguistic evidence, however, shows
that C. arietinum was cultivated in the Nile Valley at least as far back as the
New Kingdom. Among a number of plants listed in a school text49 of this
time is one called in Egyptian hrw-bik, fit. “falcon-faces”, and a comparison
of the chick pea, with its “hook” or “beak”, with Egyptian representations
of hawks’ heads puts the identification beyond all doubt (PI. v). Indeed, it
would be difficult to think of a more apt name50.
   Turning now to cereals, the word for “barley” was it, which occurs from
the First Dynasty onwards51. Frequently found are the expressions “Upper
Egyptian barley” and “Lower Egyptian barley52”, which probably refer to
the geographical provenance of the grain rather than to any botanical differ¬
ences. One may compare the market descriptions baladi beheiri “Lower
Egyptian” and baladi saidi “Upper Egyptian” applied at the present time to
the grain of Egyptian cone wheat, Triticum pyramidale, according to its
origin53. At a later date (Dynasty XX onwards) a compound expression
occurs quite commonly, viz. it-m-it, literally “barley as barley”. Two slightly
differing explanations of this term have been proposed: according to Cemy54,
“prices, especially small sums, were often expressed by means of equivalent
quantity of barley. In order to avoid this conception of the word ‘barley’ one
mostly said ‘barley as barley’ (i.e. ‘barley in the form of actual barley’) when
speaking of barley in natural” Gardiner55 suggests that by Ramesside times it
had in addition to its meaning “barley” acquired the more general meaning
of “com” (one may compare the use of hd — “silver” and “money in
general”). When it was desired to specify “barley”, as opposed to corn in
general, the term it-m-it was employed.
   Another common cereal name is bdt, later bty, which also occurs in the
First Dynasty56. It obviously cannot denote “barley”, the name for which, as
we have just seen, was it. In any case the two names occur alongside one
another on a First Dynasty seal-impression57. Nor can it denote “spelt” since
this is not attested archaeologically in Egyptian grain finds. Now it has been
noted that apart from a few stray instances of club wheat in neolithic sites,
all the grain deposits found in Egypt, from the neolithic period down to
138   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   DIXON


Roman times, consisted of emmer. There can be no doubt, therefore, that bdt
is the Egyptian name for this cereal.
   In a list of cereal names included in the Onomasticon of Amenope (Dynasty
XX) are seven different kinds of bty. Gardiner58 regarded the enumeration of
these seven kinds as showing that “bdt cannot be tied down to one single
botanical species, so that there may be some justification for the alternative
rendering ‘spelt’ that is often adopted”. Spelt, we repeat, is not attested from
Egypt. Of the seven kinds of bdt (bty) named, four are distinguished by their
colour, viz. “white”, “black”, “red”, and “orange-red”( ?)59. It seems clear
that Gardiner bases his view mainly on these varied colours, which doubtless
refer to some prominent or obvious feature of the bdt in question, most likely
the grain. These different colours, however, in no way tell against their all
being emmer. Emmer grains do vary in colour; according to Percival60, the
colour is chiefly white, red, or yellowish, or gradations thereof—pale red,
reddish-yellow, amber, and even (in some Abyssinian varieties) a deep
purple.
   In a discussion of Ramesside texts relating to the transport and taxation of
corn, Gardiner61 drew attention to “a remarkable habit of Egyptian scribes
applicable, not only to Ramesside times, but also to the Eighteenth Dynasty:
whenever black and red ink are both being used, red ink is employed for bdt-
wheat and black for it-m-it ‘barley’; though subsequently when both kinds of
grain are being added together as ss ‘corn’ red ink may be used62”. So firmly
rooted was this habit that it actually occurs in a mere story. Hence wherever
this contrast of colours occurs in connection with com, it is reasonable to
conclude that the black amount refers to barley, and the red amount to
emmer. Furthermore, since in these Ramesside texts discussed by Gardiner
the amounts written in black are both smaller and fewer than those in red,
most payments in corn, and especially tax-payments, were made in emmer,
not barley.
   During the Old and Middle Kingdoms the leading cereal was barley,
emmer being second, judging from the common expression it bdt “barley and
emmer”. This expression occurs still in the New Kingdom but the relative
importance of the two cereals was already reversed.
   From the Twenty-fifth Dynasty and through the Persian Period emmer was
the main cereal. For example, in the Adoption Stela of Nitokris, dating from
the reign of Psammetichus I, “3 khar of first-class emmer” are given to
Nitokris “from the temple of Rec-Atum in the Hek‘adje nome, . . . after it
has been offered in the (divine) presence, every day, and the god has been
satisfied therewith63”. The pre-eminence of emmer is likewise attested in the
Demotic papyrus from El-Hibeh, known as the “Petition of Peteesi” (Dem.
P. John Rylands IX), which dates from the reign of Darius I; as well as in
other Demotic papyri from this site64.
   Another word denoting some cereal is swt. While it appears to denote a
wheat of some kind, its precise meaning is not clear. If it be not a general
                                        A note on cereals in ancient Egypt    139


term for wheat, it is difficult to suggest what it could be. It was distinct from
it and bdt, for on a stela dated to year eight of Ramesses II, the king bragging
of his concern for the welfare of his workmen, says: “Upper Egypt continu¬
ally conveys for you to Lower Egypt and Lower Egypt conveys for you to
Upper Egypt, barley, emmer, szor-wheat, salt(?), and beans in immense
quantity65”. Tackholm66 says swt denoted naked wheat, but admits that such
wheats were of “but little importance in Egypt until the Ptolemaic period”.
As we have just seen, however, and as Mrs. Tackholm herself notes, swt
occurs very commonly from at least the Old Kingdom onwards. It cannot
denote macaroni wheat, T. durum, since as we have seen this is not attested in
Egypt until the Graeco-Roman period. Nor, it seems, can it denote einkom,
as Mrs. Tackholm suggested in a later publication67. Spelt, too, is ruled out.
Helbaek68 suggests that swt denotes “a variety of Emmer which perhaps while
alive was distinguished by some character that does not readily appear from
the material in the mummified state”. If so, we must wait for the morph¬
ologists to point out the finer distinctions in the emmer material already
recovered. There is, of course, the possibility that over the centuries swt
(earlier zwt) may have changed its meaning.
   A not uncommon term for some form of cereal is bs3, which occurs, along
with wheat and dates, on Second Dynasty stelae69. From the Third Dynasty
through to the Twelfth it appears as a label on granaries depicted on funerary
monuments. From the Fourth Dynasty dates usually occur in the same scenes,
often, though not always, in adjacent bins. The pairing of bs3 and dates occurs
also in four accounts in the Kahun papyri70, in an account in P. Boulaq 18,
and in the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus71. Despite this association with
dates, however, and the existence of the Coptic sBHHzy bBEz>/ meaning
“unripe figs”, there seems little doubt that bs3 was a cereal, not a fruit72. Thus
in two Old Kingdom tombs are scenes depicting men reaping a cereal which
looks somewhat like barley. Above the scenes is the legend “beer for he who
cuts the bs3”. Bs3 is mentioned in Old Kingdom tombs in bread- and beer¬
making scenes, but it is not quite certain with which activity the bs3 is to be
connected. In two tombs, however, is the legend “grinding bs3”. The verb
used, tiss, is known only from these examples, and according to the Worter-
buch, its cognate or derivative ts(3) “to crush” is used in connection with
grain only in the process of beer-making. Proof that bs3 was used in beer¬
making is afforded by the references in P. Math. Rhind 71 and in the above-
mentioned Moscow Mathematical Papyrus, where, as already noted, it is
associated with dates. There is apparently no technical objection to dates
having been used as an ingredient in beer.
   For reasons already given, bs3 cannot have been spelt. That it was an old
generic name for “barley” seems ruled out by the circumstance that in
various Old Kingdom representations of granaries it is shown together with
Upper Egyptian barley and Lower Egyptian barley. In a review of Gardiner’s
discussion of the question73 Nims74 suggested that bs3 was a “word for any
140   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    DIXON


grain set aside for or specially prepared for beer-making” and that it might
mean “malt”. In a later article on the bread and beer problems of the Moscow
Mathematical Papyrus, he cites75 as additional support for his view Oppen-
heim’s study of brewing in Mesopotamia76 in which the latter shows that malt
was used there from the Sumerian period onwards, and served as a primary
food as well as for brewing. In view of the fact that malt (sprouted barley) has
been found in Egyptian tombs, Nims suggests that a similar development
probably took place also in Egypt77. The occurrence on Second Dynasty
stelae of wheat, dates, and malt (bs3) is an indication, according to Nims, of
the use of malt as a primary food. He cites too an inscription in the tomb of
Neferhotep at Thebes, Eighteenth Dynasty, which refers to the making of an
“Osiris-bed”, i.e. a seed-bed in the form of that deity. The inscription runs:
“4th month of the Inundation, day 19. The day of moistening the bs3 and
spreading out the bed of Osiris NN78.” In the Moscow Papyrus the bs3
mentioned in connection with the beer problems would not be a new element,
but “only Upper Egyptian barley which has been ‘sprouted’ or ‘malted’ in
preparation for brewing79”.80



      Notes
       1 A much fuller treatment will appear in the author’s The Food Plants of
         Pharaonic Egypt (in preparation) and references here have therefore been
         kept to a minimum.
       2 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). Flora of Egypt, 1. Cairo, pp. 242-6.
       3 Percival, J. (1921). The Wheat Plant. London, pp. 186-7.
       4 Petrie, W. M. F. (1901). The Royal Tombs of the Earliest Dynasties, Part
         II. London, p. 23; pis. 5, 16; 6, 17 = pi. 34, 82-3.
       5 Debono, F. (1948). El Omari (pres d’Helouan). Expose sommaire sur les
         campagnes des fouilles 1943-1944 et 1948, Annales du Service des Anti-
         quites de VEgypte, 48, p. 568 and pis. 7, 2.
       6 Lauer, J.-Ph., Tackholm, V. Laurent, Aberg, E. (1951). Les Plantes
         decouvertes dans les souterrains de l’enceinte du roi Zoser a Saqqara
         (Hie Dynastie), Bull, de VInstitut d’Egypte, 32, p. 127.
       7 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). ibid.
       8 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). ibid.
       9 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). op. cit. pp. 127-8.
      10 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). op. cit. pp. 156-7.
      11 Lauer, J.-Ph. et al. (1951). op. cit. p. 157.
      12 Helbaek, H. (1953). Queen Icheti’s Wheat. A Contribution to the Study of
         Early Dynastic Emmer of Egypt [Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes
         Selskab, Biologiske Meddelelser, bind 21, 8]. Copenhagen.
      13 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit. p. 6.
      14 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit. p. 10.
      15 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit. p. 11.
      16 Helbaek, H. (1955). Ancient Egyptian Wheats, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 21,
         pp. 94-95- .
      17 References in Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 254.
      18 Caton-Thompson, G. and Gardner, E. W. (1934). The Desert Fayum.
         London, pp. 46-7.
      19 Caton-Thompson, G. and Gardner, E. W. (1934). ibid.
                                   A note on cereals in ancient Egypt     141


20 Helbaek, H. (1955). op. tit. pp. 93-4.
21 Helbaek, H. (1955). op. tit. p. 94.
22 Helbaek, H. (1955). ibid.
23 Reference in Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 254.
24 Reference in Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). ibid.
25 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. pp. 254-5.
26 In Caton-Thompson, G. and Gardner, E. W. (1934). op. cit. p. 48.
27 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. pp. 287-92.
28 Percival, J. (1936). Cereals of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, Nature,
   Lond., 138, pp. 271-272.
29 Helbaek, H. (1959). Domestication of food plants in the Old World,
   Science, 130, No. 3372,pp. 6 and 8, n. 29.
30 Loret, V. (1892). La Flore Pharaonique. 2nd Edit. Paris, p. 24.
31 Carter, H. (1933). The Tomb of Tut. Ankh. Amen, III. London, p. 61 and
   pi. 64.
32 Quibell, J. E. (1908). Tomb ofYuaa and Thuiu. Cairo, pp. 35-6 Nos.
   51022-3.
33 Daressy, G. (1902). Fouilles de la Vallee des Rois. Cairo, pp. 25-6, pi. 7,
   No. 24061; cf. p. 170, Nos. 24664-5, 24667 (from the tomb*of Amenophis
   II).
34 Anon. (1934). The Egyptian Museum, Cairo. A Brief Description of the
   Principal Monuments. Cairo, p. 76 (No. 3840. B).
35 Determined by V. Tackholm.
36 Schweinfurth, G. (1887). Die letzten botanischen Entdeckungen in den
   Grabern Agyptens, Botanische Jahrbucher fur Systematik, Pflanzen-
   geschichte und Pflanzengeographie, herausg. von A. Engler, 8, p. 12.
37 Unger, F. (i860). Botanische Streifziige auf dem Gebiet der Cultur-
   geschichte, Sitzungsberichte der Kaiser lichen Akademie der Wissenschaften
   in Wien, Math.-Naturwissenschf. Classe, 38.
38 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit., p. 537.
39 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). ibid.
40 Unger, F. (i860), ibid.
41 Winlock, H. E. and W. E. Crum. (1926). The Monastery of Epiphanius at
    Thebes. I. New York. p. 61.
42 Unger, F. (1862). Botanische Streifziige auf dem Gebiete der Cultur-
   geschichte. V. Inhalt eines alten agyptisches Ziegels an organischen
   Korpern, Sitzungsberichte der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in
    Wien, Math.-Naturwissenschf. Classe, 45. p. 81.
43 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 460. (Several other specimens with
   panicles were found in graves of the Christian period at Antinoe, c.
   fifth century A.D.)
44 Netolitzky, F. (1914). Die Hirse aus antiken Funden, Sitzungsberichte der
   Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Math.-Natur¬
   wissenschf., Klasse, 33, pp. 741, 755 (referred to here under the old name
   Panicum colonum L.).
45 Caylus, de (1752). Recueil d’antiquites Egyptiennes. Paris.
46 Daressy, G. (1922). Le Riz dans PEgypte Antique Bull, de VInstitut
   d’Egypte, 4, p. 37.
47 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 412.
48 Apart from one find of post-Pharaonic date (second to third century A.D.)
    and another of uncertain date mentioned by Gardener Wilkinson, I know
   of no published references to finds of C. arietinum in Egypt.
49 Papyrus Anastasi IV, 8, 10 = P. Lansing, 11, 5. English transl. in
    Caminos, R. (1954). Late Egyptian Miscellanies. London, pp. 164 and 410.
50 Keimer, L. (1929). “Falcon-face”, Ancient Egypt, 1929, pp. 47-8.
51 e.g. Emery, W. B. (1958). Great Tombs of the First Dynasty, III. London,
    p. 60, pis. 37, 18; 83, 3.
142   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants       DIXON


      52 cf. Sethe, K. (1907). Die Namen von Ober- und Unteragypten und die
         Bezeichnungen fiir Nord und Sud, Z. fur dgyptische Sprache und Alter-
         tumskunde, 44, p. 19.
      53 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 232.
      54 Cemy, J. (1934). Fluctuations in Grain Prices during the Twentieth
         Egyptian Dynasty, Archiv Orientalni, 6, p. 175, n. 1.
      55 Gardiner, A. H. (1941). Ramesside Texts relating to the Taxation and
         Transport of Corn, J. Egyptian Archaeology, 27, p. 24, n. 3.
      56 e.g. Emery, W. B. (1958). op. cit. p. 36.
      57 Emery, W. B. (1958). op. cit. p. 36, pis. 37, 18.
      58 Gardiner, A. H. (1947). Ancient Egyptian Onomastica II. Oxford, p. 222*.
      59 On the rendering “orange-red” for kt, see the discussion in Gardiner,
         A. H. (1947). °P- cit- PP- 222*—3* and the references there cited.
      60 Percival, J. (1921). op. cit. p. 191.
      61 Gardiner, A. H. (1941). op. cit. pp. 19-73.
      62 Gardiner, A. H. (1941). op. cit. pp. 26-7.
      63 Caminos, R. A. (1964). The Nitocris Adoption Stela, J. Egyptian Archae¬
         ology, 50, pp. 75-6.
      64 Griffith, F. LI. (1909). Catalogue of the Demotic Papyri in the John Rylands
         Library, Manchester, III. Manchester, p. 78, n. 11.
      65 Hamada, A. (1938). A stela from Manshiyet es-Sadr, Annales du Service,
         38, pp. 217-30.
      66 Tackholm, V. and G. (1941). op. cit. p. 253.
      67 Lauer, J.-Ph., Tackholm, V. Laurent, Aberg, E. (1951). op. cit. p. 128.
      68 Helbaek, H. (1953). op. cit- P- 13.
      69 Saad, Z. Y. (1957). Ceiling Stelae in Second Dynasty Tombs. Cairo. Nos.
         15, 17, 18, 19; pis. 26, 21, 22, 23.
      70 Griffith, F. LI. (1898). Hieratic Papyri from Kahun and Gurob. London.
         Pis. 15, 66, 67; 18, 3, 4; 19, 3, 4-
      71 Nims, C. F. (1958). The bread and beer problems of the Moscow
         Mathematical Papyrus, J. Egyptian Archaeology, 44, pp. 56-65.
      72 Gardiner, A. H. (1947). op. cit. II. pp. 223*~4*.
      73 Gardiner, A. H. (1947). ibid.
      74 Nims, C. F. (1950). Egyptian catalogues of things, J. of Near Eastern
         Studies, 9, pp. 261 ff.
      75 Nims, C. F. (1958). op. cit. p. 63.
      76 Hartman, L. F. and Oppenheim, A. L. (1950). On beer and brewing
         techniques in Ancient Mesopotamia, J. Amer. Or. Soc., Suppl. 10.
      77 Nims, C. F. (1958). op. cit. p. 63.
      78 Nims, C. F. (1958). ibid, (quoted).
      79 Nims, C. F. (1958). ibid.
      80 Bs3, swt, and other cereals used in bread-making and brewing, are dis¬
         cussed in some detail by H. Wild in an article (1966, Brasserie et pani-
         fication au tombeau de Ti, Bull, de TInst. fr. d’Arch. orientale, 64, pp.
         95 ff.), which came to hand too late to be utilised in the foregoing paper.
         Mrs. Tackholm has since accepted Helbaek’s identification of the alleged
         einkorn from El-Omari and Saqqara as emmer (Personal communication
         and cf. Tackholm, V. (1964), Favaas Blomster, Stockholm).
      ARLETTE LEROI-GOURHAN

      Pollen grains of Gramineae and Cerealia from
      Shanidar and Zawi Chemi

Much work has been done which shows us the geographical distribution of the
wild grasses which are ancestral to cultivated cereals; these grasses are found
over vast areas in the Middle East, but we need more localized evidence and
especially their relation to prehistoric sites. The variation of their geographical
distribution during the Wurm climatic oscillations is still not known; most of
our information concerns the present although something is known about
their distribution during the last ten thousand years.
   Although both pollens and grains are found in prehistoric excavations,
it is only the latter which have been studied. Of course, in so far as they
are available at all, it is the grains and seeds which yield the more precise
information about species and evolution of cultivated types. However,
despite the difficulties of studying pollen, they can reveal vital information.
For a site which is clearly pre-agricultural, by its industry (Mousterian for
example) or by radiocarbon dating, it is only pollen analysis which can, except
in the most exceptional circumstances, suggest the existence of an ancient
“cereal type” in the pollen grains of wild grasses.
   Two different measurements allow us to divide grass pollens into different
types; the first being the diameter of the grain and the second, the external
diameter of the annulus (or ring) encircling the pore.
   1. Small grains, less than 40/x, on average from 20/x to 35/x, annulus
smaller than 8/x, generally 5^ to 6^; such grass pollens belong to wild species.
   2. Middle size grains from 40/z, to 45/1 (and even 50jjl), annulus reaching
io/x: “Cerealia type”; such grains comprise wild species, wild ancestors of
cultivated species and cultivated species.
   3. Grains larger than 50/x and annulus from io^ to 13^; most of these
belong to cultivated species which have been domesticated for some time.
The problem comes with the second group, for “Cerealia type” grain can be
either cultivated or wild. Inspection of their morphology can help to dis¬
tinguish between them, and can even differentiate species, but it can hardly
be used for old and fossil pollens1.
   If the “Cerealia type” pollens are found throughout a long pre- and early
144   Port II Domestication and exploitation of plants     LEROI-GOURHAN


agricultural sequence, it is difficult to establish the beginning of agriculture.
The inception of agriculture may be marked by an increase in the percentages
of “Cerealia types” or by the presence of very large types, but great difficulties
are involved in their study. In the Zeribar lake deposits, van Zeist has shown
that, in this region of Iran, “Cerealia type” pollens existed more than 20,000
years ago2.
  If, on the other hand, as at Shanidar in northern Iraq (see the excavations
by R. Solecki3), such “Cerealia type” pollens are absent or very rare during
pre-agricultural periods, there are two possible explanations. First, this may
be due simply to climatic fluctuations in the Zagros mountains during the
Wixrm glaciation in which the lowering in altitude of vegetational zones
excluded their growth. Similarly their later appearance may also be due to
natural causes (changes in temperature or dryness) during which the vegeta¬
tional zones were submitted to new variations. Second, the later appearance
of such pollens may be due to human agency associated with the diffusion of
agriculture. It seems that it is the latter explanation which appears to have
operated at Shanidar.



      Shanidar Cave
Palynological results were obtained from twenty-two samples from the
different occupation levels of Shanidar Cave. Despite the presence of a thinly
wooded environment (whose fluctuations have been used for assessing some
climatic variations), herbaceous plants are abundant throughout suggesting
steppe, savannah or steppe-park so that it has been possible to analyse them
throughout the stratigraphic sequence (even the earliest level). All the
Gramineae pollen grains have been measured (see Table 1).
  In all the samples from the Mousterian, the Baradostian (Upper Palaeo¬
lithic) and the mesolithic levels, the grain sizes are small, rarely reaching 38/x
and 8/k, for the annulus. There are only three exceptions where a pollen grain
exceeds 40/1 and the annulus 9ft. It therefore appears that grasses with large
pollen grains were not characteristic of the nearest local flora but they may
have occurred only rarely, or they may have existed at some distance from the
cave. Studies concerning the dispersal of grass pollen, which is anemophilous,
yielded some information. J. Heim has shown that, beyond a few kilometres
from the fields, the percentage of Cerealia pollens is very low4.
   There is only one sample from the lower part of the Proto-Neolithic level
and its exact stratigraphic context is not known. The pollen diagram from 1 m.
to the surface shows striking differences from those of lower levels, for there
are numerous “Cerealia type” pollens, a few of them exceeding 50ft. Although
there is a decrease in the tree pollen values, there is not sufficient evidence to
suggest a significant climatic change. But, as van Zeist has commented, the
introduction of new wild species (such as Aegilops) from a nearby area may
                                    Pollen grains of Gramineae and Cerealia          145

                                     SHANIDAR


                           Gramineae             “Cerealia type”
                        grain diam. <40^   grain diam. <40/t    >40^      Total nos. of
        Level            ann. diam. <8/t    ann. diam. >8ft      > 8ft      pollens

Recent (A)
  o-6o m.                     203                 73             36           364

Proto-Neolithic (Bi)
  0-50 m.                     212                 25             20           377
  0-70 m.                     128                 15             25           726
  1-oo m.                     215                 II             19           525
  Bottom                       36                  2               I          151

Mesolithic (B2)
 2-85 m.                       22                                              70

Baradostian
  3-00 m.                      20                                              61
  3-40 m.                       7                                              24
  3'75 m.                       4                                              25
  4-00 m.                      54                   1                         361

Mousterian
 4-25 m.                        7                                              36
 4-35 m.                        3                                              13
 6-30 m.                        3                                              10
 6-40 m.                        4                                              28
 7-30 m.                       10                                              66
 7-50 m.                       20                                              7i
 7-57 m.                       15                                  I            61
 Neanderth. IV                 22                                        min. 1816
 8'6o m.                       12                                              188
 9-65 m.                       18                                  I           107


Table 1       Wild Gramineae and “Cerealia type”; number of pollen grains.


possibly be due to minor climatic fluctuations; the possibility of a change
in the flora due to animal domestication must also be kept in mind. Yet the
sudden appearance of numerous large “Cerealia type” pollens seems to be
due to human action which, at Shanidar, could be the first evidence of
agriculture.



       Zawi Chemi

In her paper on the village site of Zawi Chemi (c. 4 kilometres from Shanidar
Cave), R. L. Solecki5 noted that throughout the whole of the main layer (B)
the same material culture (Proto-Neolithic) was found; a long occupation of
the site is suggested. Domesticated sheep appear late in the sequence and,
as polished and chipped celts occur only towards the top of the deposit, we
may suppose the evolution of the industry to have lasted perhaps for even a
few thousand years. Unfortunately the one carbon-14 date available
146      Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants        leroi-gourhan

(10,870 b.p.) was estimated from charcoal which came from a different area
from our samples.
   The Proto-Neolithic level is more than two metres thick in some parts of
the excavation and is covered by c. 0-50 m. of recent deposits. Here it is much
easier than at Shanidar to follow the botanical progression since we have
more than fifteen samples from the various sub-levels (see Table 2).

                                    ZAWI-CHEMI


                                 Gramineae            “Cerealia type”
                             grain diam. <40^   grain diam. <40/x    >40/x   Total nos.
            Level             ann. diam. <&n     ann. diam. >8/x     > 8/i   of pollens

Recent
  (Fi)   0-25 m.                     7                                          101
         0-25 m.                    55                                2        1226
         0-30 m.                    61                                2        2022
  (C4)(a)o-50 m.                     2                                           40

Proto-Neolithic
                   0-90 m.         no                        1    +   5         697
                   0-95 m.          12                       3    +   2         419
                   1-oo m.          6l                       3    +   4         556
  polished celts   1-20 m.         Il6                       2    +   2         422
              (C4) i-6o m.           6                                           86
  domestic sheep ? 1-70 m.          38                                          377
                   1-90 m.          84                       4    +   5         501
                   1-95 m.          29                       3                  705
                   2-05 m.          34                       4    +   1         632
              (C4) 2-15 m.          28                       2    +   4         241
                   2-20 m.          5i                       1    +   x         602
              (C4) 2-2i m.          13                                          376
                   2-35 m.          83                                          365
                   2-45 m.          22                                          X12


  (a) The samples without numbers are all from area B4.


Table 2     Wild Gramineae and “Cerealia type”; number of pollen grains.


   Throughout layer B, no change can be seen in the tree pollen group which
remains very low. There is a slight fluctuation in the composition of the
herbaceous pollens; Chenopodiaceae increase from the bottom to 1-95 m. at
which point they constitute 41% of the total pollen. Above this level they
decrease rapidly. Gramineae increase in percentage after the Chenopodiaceae
maximum. This change may be due either to human agency or to a variation
from a drier to a wetter climate.
   From the bottom until c. 2-20 m., the grass pollen grains are still small
(still no agriculture ?); above this, larger pollen grains appear, rarely exceed¬
ing 45/x, but with annulus as large as 8-5/2 or even 10jx. At 1-90 m., the per¬
centage of grass increases; there was only one pollen grain larger than 50/2
and this remains a unique specimen from the Zawi Chemi Proto-Neolithic.
In the higher sublevels of this main culture there is a series of large grains
                                    Pollen grains of Gramineae and Cerealia       147


as well as the small grains which characterized the beginning of the deposit;
this fact, and more especially the larger size of the annulus, suggest the
introduction of agriculture.
   The Proto-Neolithic level from Shanidar Cave, where similar artifacts are
found, appears to be somewhat more evolved—with respect to the pollens—
in its uppermost part. The percentage of grass pollen is higher and seems
undoubtedly due to the proximity of a cultivated field. The sizes of the pollen
grains are, on average, similar to those from the Proto-Neolithic of Zawi
Chemi, yet, with a low, although constant, proportion of grains exceeding
50^.




       Recent levels
The “recent” level at Shanidar gives us the surest example of agriculture;
c. 55% of the grass pollens are larger than 40/x or have a large annulus which
may reach as much as 12/x in diameter. Furthermore, some of them have a
thick exine or a strongly marked pitting. It is possible that this larger grain
size may have been due to improvement of locally cultivated varieties but it
seems also that it may be the result of the introduction of new species6.
   Not all recent levels yield many “Cerealia type” grains; at Zawi Chemi,
between 0-25 m. and 0-30 m., only four pollen grains of this type were found
among more than 3000 grains, while the Composites predominated. It is worth
noting J:hat the site is actually located in a wheat field, so that no, or very
little mixing could have taken place.
   A large number of pollen analyses are needed to shed light on several
outstanding problems concerning the Near East: e.g. the vegetational history
and its connection with fluctuations of temperature and precipitation during
the Wurm glaciation and the Holocene; the extent to which the distribution
of the wild ancestors of cereal species at the beginning of plant domestication
differed from their known present distribution; the evolution of pollens of
cultivated forms which should be investigated by a joint study of the pollens
and grains from Pre-ceramic and Early Neolithic sites.



       Notes
       1 Beug, H. J. (1961). Leitfaden der Pollenbestimmung. 1. Stuttgart.
       2 van Zeist, W. (1967). Late Quaternary vegetation history of western Iran,
         Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol., 2, pp. 301-11.
       3 Solecki, R. S. (1963). Prehistory in Shanidar valley, northern Iraq, Science,
         Jan. 18, 139, No. 1551, pp. 179-93-
       4 Heim, J. (1962). Recherches sur les relations entre la vegetation actuelle et
         le spectre pollinique recent dans les Ardennes beiges, Bull. Soc. R. Bot.
         Belgique, 96, pp. 5-92.
       5 Solecki, R. L. (1964). Zawi Chemi Shanidar, a post-pleistocene village site
148   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     leroi-GOURHAN


        in northern Iraq, Rep. Vlth Intern. Congr. Quatem. Warsaw, 1961, pp.
        405-512.
      6 W. R. Stanton has pointed out that the change in pollen size could be due
        to agronomic changes; the distance travelled by the pollen decreases with
        the larger size of grain, so larger pollens are only possible with a high
        density of planting. G. W. Dimbleby has pointed out that the maize pollens
        of c. 80,000 years ago are of the same order of size as today, as maize is
        self-pollinating; see Hawkes, J. G., this volume p. 27.
     J. M. RENFREW

     The archaeological evidence for the domestication of
     plants: methods and problems


     Introduction

During the past ten years a substantial quantity of cereal grains and seeds
have been recovered in excavations of the earliest neolithic village sites in the
Near East and South-east Europe. These plant remains, dating to before
5000 B.C., shed new light on the origins and development of plant domestica¬
tion in the Old World and are of the greatest interest to agricultural botanists
and plant geneticists as well as to prehistorians. Most of the palaeoethno-
botanical material from the Near East has been examined and identified by
Dr. Hans Helbaek (Copenhagen), and a glance at the references for this paper
will reveal the extent to which all students of these problems are indebted to
his work. Other early deposits chiefly in Southern Europe have been studied
by Dr. Maria Hopf, Dr. Willem van Zeist and by the present author.
  This paper sets out to make a complete and comprehensive survey of all
the finds of palaeoethnobotanical material so far published which comes from
sites dating to before 5000 b.c. in the Old World, and also includes several
hitherto unpublished finds examined by the author, belonging to this period.
It is proposed first to describe the nature of the material—preserved by
carbonization, as grain impressions or silica skeletons—and this will be
followed by an outline of the methods used for identification of the material.
Special reference will be made to the differences between wild and domesti¬
cated forms, and the extent to which these can be recognized in the palaeo¬
ethnobotanical material. It was thought useful to follow this with a catalogue of
the finds so far available, giving details of the material from each site, which
form the basis for this discussion. The finds thus set out will then be analysed
for each species found—giving the archaeological evidence for domestica¬
tion. Comparison of these results with modern theories of plant genetics
reveals various discrepancies and the problems raised will be considered.
150   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   RENFREW




      Methods

      The survival of the evidence


The palaeoethnobotanical material survives from the period of the beginnings
of agriculture in three different forms: as carbonized material, impressions in
mud-daub and coarse pot sherds, and as small fragments of silica skeletons in
ash and carbon detritus. (For a general discussion of these forms of preserva¬
tion see Helbaek1.)
   The bulk of the material we are considering was preserved by carbonization.
The grain and seeds were converted to carbon while more or less retaining
their characteristic shape as a result of overheating near a hearth, or in a
parching oven (the primitive glumed wheats in particular needed to be
parched before they could be threshed and winnowed satisfactorily2); or by a
house fire in the area in which they were stored. They did not become car¬
bonized by spontaneous combustion3. The carbonized material from these
early sites consists of whole spikelets of wheat (e.g. Hacilar) and barley (e.g.
Jarmo), spikelet forks of wheat (e.g. Ah Kosh), rachis fragments of naked
wheat (e.g. £atal Hiiyiik), and of barley (Ah Kosh), and carbonized grains
and seeds (e.g. £atal Hiiyiik and most of the early finds in Greece and
Bulgaria).
  Two important finds, however, were preserved as impressions in mud-daub
in the construction of walls and roofs of houses, where the mud had first been
mixed with straw and chaff (perhaps sweepings from the threshing floor). At
Jarmo impressions of wild and domesticated emmer wheat spikelets were
recovered from baked clay and mud-daub. Impressions form the chief
source of evidence for the Pre-Pottery Neolithic husbandry at Beidha, where
a primitive and transitional form of hulled two-row barley was the chief
species found. At Argissa-Maghula in Thessaly Dr. Maria Hopf found
impressions of einkorn and emmer wheats and hulled six-row barley. Im¬
pressions in pottery have also been found from this early period. In this case
the spikelets and grains became incorporated in the wet clay as the pot was
being built and were then burnt out when the vessel was fired, thus leaving a
perfect mould of the grain from which a latex cast can be obtained. Such
impressions of emmer wheat spikelets and internodes, and florets of hulled
barley were found in coarse ware sherds of phase A in the ‘Amuq.
  Occasionally associated with impressions of grain in mud-daub and coarse
sherds there occur silica skeletons of small fragments of the epidermis and
glumes which can be identified on microscopic examination. The cell walls of
the epidermis of grass seeds and those of some other plants contain silica
which is deposited during the growth of the cell. This silica remains when the
organic material disappears due to burning or to natural decay. When
embedded in mud-daub or mud bricks or objects of baked clay these silica
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   151


skeletons may survive indefinitely, forming an exact replica of the plant cell
and retaining all the characteristics of the walls and pits of the epidermis4. In
the ‘Amuq finds silica skeletons of the dorsal pale, the glume and an internode
of emmer wheat were found together with those of a wild oat pale and the
epidermis of rye grass5. Fragments of silica skeletons are also occasionally
found in deposits of ash and carbon detritus for example fragments of wheat
and barley epidermal cells were found at Jarmo6.

     Methods and problems of identification


The early plant remains are identified by a careful study of the minute details
of morphology preserved in the grains and seeds and comparison with the
corresponding parts of fresh plants of the same species. The examiner must
also be aware of the different forms of distortion which may occur due to the
form of preservation of the material. In all forms of preservation the tech¬
niques of identification are based solely on the correlation between the
morphology of the ancient grains and seeds with that of their modem counter¬
parts. Direct evidence for the structure of the chromosomes are not obtain¬
able7.
   The first plants to be domesticated by man in the Old World appear to have
been the cereals wheat and barley. In the period with which we are concerned
three species of wheat, Triticum monococcum, Triticum dicoccum, and Triticum
aestivum became established as fully domesticated crops, and both hulled and
naked varieties of two- and six-row barley were also grown. In Thessaly oats
and millet may also have come into cultivation at this period. Also present on
many of the early sites are various representatives of the pulses especially
peas, lentils and vetch, and although these have not been studied so intensively
it seems likely that peas and lentils at least had been domesticated by 5000
B.c. Another crop which falls outside the categories mentioned so far is flax
which appears to have come into cultivation in the Near East certainly before
the end of our period.

Wheat.    The earliest finds consist of the glumed diploid einkorn and tetra-
ploid emmer wheats and their wild ancestors; these can be shown to be
genetically more primitive than the naked hexaploid bread wheat and club
wheat which also occur before 5000 b.c.8 The chief difference between wild
and domesticated glume wheats lies in the fragility of the rachis; the wild
species have a britde rachis enabling individual spikelets to disarticulate on
ripening and thus disperse the seeds. The domestic forms of the glume wheats
also have a brittle rachis, but it tends not to break up into spikelets until
threshed. Thus it seems that the earliest farmers selected their seed grain from
those spikes which remained intact until the whole ear was ready for harvest¬
ing. Besides the brittleness of the rachis other features of the wild einkorn
T. boeoticum and wild emmer T. dicoccoides are the great size, coarseness and
152   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   RENFREW


extreme hairiness of their spikelets and their long ripening period, so that the
uppermost grains may have dispersed before the lower ones on the same spike
have ripened. In the case of wild einkorn two varieties are known: there is a
small single-grained race which is found chiefly in the Balkans and western
Anatolia, T. boeoticum ssp. aegilopoides, and a larger twin-grained variety
occurring in S. Turkey, Iraq, and Iran T. boeoticum ssp. thaoudar9. The spike
of the cultivated einkorn, T. monococcum, tends to be shorter and more com¬
pact than that of the wild species. The grains, though still pointed at both
ends, are shorter and broader than those of T. boeoticum10. Both single and
twin grained forms of T. monococcum occur on the early sites.
  Wild emmer differs from wild einkorn in being on the whole much
larger, and in having invariably two grains ripening per spikelet. The spike
is thus less compressed laterally. The glume has a single prominent keel
contrasting with the wild and cultivated forms of einkorn which have two
keels to their glumes11. Most forms have a very hairy rachis. Cultivated
emmer tends to have a more or less glabrous spike in contrast to T. dicoc-
coides, and the head is shorter, denser, and less hairy and the grains much
plumper than in the wild species12. Thus the wild wheat species may be
distinguished from each other and from their cultivated progeny. The chief
differences between cultivated einkorn and emmer grains may be briefly
summarized as follows: grains of einkorn tend to be very narrow indeed
averaging about 1-5-2 mm., and in the single-grained varieties they have a
rounded profile in both dorsal and ventral aspects. The grains of two-grained
einkorn are closer to those of emmer, being flattened ventrally, but are
distinguished by their shortness and narrowness. Caryopses of emmer are
plumper than those of einkorn and have a characteristic hollow in the ventral
aspect.
  The hexaploid wheats have no wild progenitor to correspond with T.
boeoticum or T. dicoccoides. They are derived from emmer probably through
crossing with a species of Aegilops13. The hexaploid wheats which concern us
here are the naked T. aestivum (bread wheat) and T. comp actum (club wheat).
They are distinguished from the foregoing cultivated species by having much
shorter, fatter, more rounded grains, with the greatest width near the embryo.
There is a marked difference in the spikelet fragments too—instead of form¬
ing a “fork” as in einkorn and emmer where the keels of the glumes and the
rachis intemode adhere firmly together as a single unit, bread and club
wheat spikelets break quite differently with the rachis segments adhering
together whilst the glumes and keels have invariably disintegrated14. The
grains of club wheat are shorter and plumper than those of bread wheat and
the rachis segments also tend to be shorter due to the denser ear form.


Barley.   The earliest cultivated barley found seems to belong to the two-row
variety and undoubtedly has derived from the wild Hordeum spontaneum. Both
wild and domesticated forms are found in the earliest deposits. The differences
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   153


between these forms are not very great. The domestic variety has a tough
rachis that does not break during threshing, whereas the wild form has a
brittle rachis breaking up into discreet spikelets on maturity each consisting
of one median fertile grain with a lateral sterile floret on either side. The
fragility of the rachis—the major distinctive feature of the wild two-row
barley—is only controlled by two genes15. In discussing the transitional forms
of two-row barley occurring at Beidha Helbaek states that the cultivated form
has larger grains16. The lateral florets of H. spontaneum are pedicellate and not
sessile as in cultivated varieties, and the pales are not wrinkled: these features
are found in the barley at Jarmo17.
   The Beidha finds, besides the transitional form of H. spontaneum which
showed signs of having been cultivated if it had not reached the point where '
it could be described as fully domesticated, also revealed a mutant of two-row
barley which must have arisen due to domestication—the naked form—but
there is no clear evidence as to the spikelet type18. The first indisputable
evidence of naked six-row barley comes from Aceramic Hacilar, but Helbaek
would like to consider all the early finds as belonging to this type19. The status
of the wild six-row barley, H. agriocrithon, in the origin of the six-row
domesticated form has been the subject of much controversy since its
discovery in Tibet (1938) and Palestine (1954). The question is which is the
more primitive condition, six- or two-row, or could they have evolved side by
side20? If as Zohary and others maintain the two-row variety is the most
primitive then the first demonstrable mutation in barley found in the
palaeoethnobotanical material is remarkably complex. The sterile lateral
florets became fertile at the same time as the pales lost their cohesion to the
caryopsis. This mutation made the grain completely dependent on man for
its reproduction since the primitive means of dispersal within the hulled
spikelet was now lost. The fact that rachis intemodes do not occur in the early
deposits, with the exception of Jarmo where several internodes were found
adhering together, suggests that the axis was no longer brittle.
   Naked barley is distinguished from the hulled form by having much wider
grains, which lack the longitudinal striations of the palea veins and have
minute transverse rippling of the surface. The six-row form is distinguished
by having distinctly twisted lateral grains, the twist being most noticeable in
the ventral aspect.
   Two other cereals may have come into cultivation at this early period
although both are represented by very few finds. They both occur on
Aceramic Neolithic sites in the fertile plain of Thessaly in Central Greece.

Broom corn millet. The wild ancestor of Panicum miliaceum is not certainly
known; Helbaek has postulated Panicum callosum Hochst., the Abyssinian
wild species, as a possibility21. The find from the Aceramic levels at Argissn-
Maghula22 is of carbonized grain measuring 1-9 X 1-9 X i-omm. which
corresponds with those for the cultivated form23.
154     Part H Domestication and exploitation of plants   RENFREW


Oats.   An exceptionally large oat grain was found in the Aceramic Neolithic
levels at Achilleion in Thessaly. Unfortunately the diagnostic lemma base,
and the point of insertion of the awn were broken away so that the species
cannot be ascertained. However the size of the grain 92 X 33 X 2-5 mm.
suggests a cultivated form cf. Avena sativa/Avena byzantina2i. It is interesting
to note in passing that the wild oat Avena ludoviciana has been identified at
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B Beidha25, and that wild oats (species not given) occur
in the Ali Kosh and Mohammad Jaffar phases at Alik Kosh26 and also in
‘Amuq A27.
   Besides the domestication of cereals it seems likely that some of the pulse
crops were beginning to come under cultivation before 5000 b.c.

Lentil.   The lentil is the most frequently found of the pulses on these early
sites. The domestic form Lens esculent a is probably derived from Lens
nigricans, and this latter form was found at Argissa28. It is not possible without
measurements to say whether the finds from Pre-Pottery B Jericho, Jarmo,
Aceramic Hacilar, Ceramic Hacilar and Tepe Sabz are wild or cultivated. The
Ghediki lentils were probably cultivated as they measured 4-1-3-2 X 3-5—3 3
mm.29 compared with 2-66 X 2-48 mm. at Argissa30. The two deposits of
lentils from Azmaska in Bulgaria contained small seeds averaging 2-7 X 2-4
mm. and must probably be considered wild31.

Peas.   The wild purple pea, Pisum elatius, is known from Aceramic Hacilar
and £atal Hiiyiik32 while on the other sites it is the field pea, Pisum sativum
var. arvensis, which is represented. It occurs at Pre-Pottery B Jericho, Jarmo,
£atal Hiiyuk, Can Hasan, Ghediki and Sesklo. Measurements of the peas
from the last three sites are available:

  Can Hasan       max. diam. 4-4 mm. length of hilum 1-9 mm.
  Ghediki         4-1-3-5 X 3-8-3‘4 X 3‘5-3'0 mm.
  Sesklo          4-2-37 X 3-5-29 x 3‘8-2-9 mm.

Vetch.   Although all the finds of vetch from these early sites probably
represent wild plants it is interesting to note that Vida ervilia which was later
cultivated, already occurs at (Jatal Hiiyuk33. Vida narbonensis, the ancestor of
the horse-bean, occurs, at Beidha34. The earliest record of cultivated horse-
bean, Vida faba, is from Pre-Pottery B Jericho. Other sites where vetches
have been found are Ah Kosh (Mohammad Jaffar Phase), Tepe Sabz, and
Jarmo.

Flax.    Finds of seeds of Linum usitatissimum occur on two sites within our
period: Tepe Sabz and Tell es-Sawwan. The one measurable seed from the
latter site was 4 mm. long and 2 4 mm. broad35.
              The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   155




     Catalogue of finds before 5000 B.c. of domesticated
     plants in the Near East and South-east Europe
The finds can be divided into the following regional groups: Iran and Iraq,
Zagros, Palestine, Syria, Anatolia, Greece and Bulgaria.

     I Iran and Iraq

1 Ali Kosh (Deh Luran plain, Iranian Khuzistan)

     (a) Bus Mordeh Phase 7500-6750 B.C.
        The plant remains obtained by Hole and Flannery using flotation
     techniques to recover the carbonized grain from the earliest level at the
     site, were identified by Helbaek, and a preliminary discussion appears
     in Helbaek36 and Hole and Flannery37. The following species have been
     identified: Triticum boeoticum38, T. monococcum39 represented by a few
     battered grains, T. dicoccumi0 small grains and spikelet forks, Hordeum
     spontaneum41, naked barley ?two-row42. Besides these cultivated
     species a number of wild pulses were collected: Medicago, Astragalus,
     and Trigonellai3.

     (b) Ali Kosh Phase 6750-6000 B.C.
       T. dicoccum and H. distichum are the chief crops in this phase; two
     grains of six-row barley were also found44. The same wild pulses were
     collected as in the previous phase and in addition the following wild
     grasses were represented: Aegilops, Lolium, wild oats and canary grass45.

     (c) Mohammad Jaffar Phase 6000-5500 B.C.
       Emmer wheat and hulled two-row barley remain the chief cultivated
     plants, and they are joined in the plant record by plantain, mallow, vetch,
     wild oat, and canary grass46. The detailed report on these finds is
     awaited with great interest.

2 Tepe Sabz (Deh Luran, Iranian Khuzistan)

     Sabz Phase 5500-5000 B.C.
       T. aestivumi?, hulled six-row barley48 and hulled two-row barley49
     are the cereals represented at this site, and “irrigated” flax is also
     represented50. The following pulses were found—lentil, vetch and
     vetchling51.

3 Tepe Guran (Luristan)
  The deposit of grain was found in a domed oven in a mud-walled house
156   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants      RENFREW


dating between 6200-5500 B.c. The grain was identified by Helbaek as
chiefly H. distichum with a few grains of H. spontaneum™.

4 Tell es-Sawwan (on the Middle Tigris in Iraq)
   The grain was found in a defensive moat 2 m. below its upper level, dating
from 5800-5600 b.c. Finds from this site are described in Helbaek53. T.
monococcum—a single grain, T. dicoccum—grains 6 3 mm. long and roughly
as wide as thick. T. aestivum: the grains were 4-5 mm. long and plumper than
the emmer grains. Naked six-row barley grains were 4-5 mm. long, rounded
and plump with a finely corrugated skin, and there were a few hulled six-row
grains also present. The grains of hulled two-row barley were 4 5—6-5 mm.
long. Three seeds of flax were also present: the only measurable grain was
4 mm. long and 2-4 mm. wide.

      II The Zagros

1 Jarmo (Iraqi Kurdistan)
   The grain comes from the early farming village dated to c. 6750 b.c.
Various wheats were found: T. aegilopoides (i.e. T. boeoticum ssp. aegilopoides),
“smaller type with convexly curved ventral and dorsal sides”54; T. mono¬
coccum, carbonized grains55, T. dicoccoides, impressions in clay66, “straight,
flat-bottomed” grains and spikelets57; T. dicoccum, spikelets (impressions)
illustrated by Helbaek58 and grains.
   Hordeum spontaneum made up the bulk of the find. The kernels were
hulled, straight and unwrinkled, some specimens consisting of the median
fertile floret with one of the lateral male florets attached59. The lateral florets
are not sessile as in modern two-row barley, but have a short pedicel. Inter¬
estingly, it appears from some axis portions, consisting of three internodes,
that the spike was not brittle as in the wild form, but had attained at least a
certain degree of toughness.
   The following pulses were also represented: field pea60; lentil61; and blue
vetchling62.
   Grains and fragments of the “sturdy” glumes of Aegilops sp. were also
identified.

2 Matarrah (Kurdish uplands)
  The finds are dated to the Hassunah period, c. 5750 b.c. Two species are
recorded: H. distichum, long straight barley grains, and impressions of two-
row spikes63; T. dicoccum64.

      Palestine


1 Beidha (Southern Jordan)
  The finds are from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic “B” village. T. dicoccum,
                The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   157


impressions of spikelets with glumes and curving keels (not straight as in the
wild species). Some spikelets were larger and coarse as in the wild form,
others small. The variation was considered typical of genetical transition65.
The carbonized grains varied in length from 5 to 10 mm.66
   H. spontaneum was found with grains of considerable size, exceeding that
of the wild species, but retaining the britde rachis67. Whole spikelets were
found with sterile laterals as well as fertile median grains68.
   Naked grains, with width/length index exceeding 0-50 were found69. The
softly rounded surface is devoid of longitudinal striations of palea veins, and
in one, the shell is minutely rippled, establishing that these are naked grains.
Since no two-row naked barley is known in antiquity, these are probably from
six-row barley70.
   The wild pulses collected include Vida narbonensis, Medicago and
Onobrychis crista-galli11.
  Amongst the weeds, the following grass species were noted: Aegilops sp.,
Lolium sp., and Avena ludoviciana72.


2 Jericho (Jordan valley)

     (a) Pre-Pottery Neolithic A
        In the earliest Pre-Pottery levels excavated by Dr. Kathleen Kenyon,
     Dr. Maria Hopf has identified the cultivated hulled two-row barley H.
     distichum and emmer wheat T. dicoccum.

     (1b) Pre-Pottery Neolithic B
        In this level Dr. Maria Hopf has identified H. distichum, T. mono-
     coccum and T. dicoccum among the cereals, and the pulse crops Pisum
     cf. sativum, Lens culinaris and Vida faba73.

      (c) Pottery Neolithic
        H. distichum, T. monococcum and T. dicoccum continue to be cultivated.


      Syria


1 lAmuq A (Plain of Antioch)
   Cereal remains were found as impressions and fragments of silica skeletons
in heavily chaff-tempered “coarse simple ware”, dated to c. 5750 b.c.
   Species found were T. dicoccum spikelet and intemode, the internode
measured 2 93 mm. from the lower tip to the articulation scar, and was
i-6o mm. wide just under the scar. The glume was 8-oo mm. long74. Hulled
barley was represented by a poorly preserved small floret, possibly a sterile
floret75. Oat, Avena sp., occurred as a silica skeleton of epidermal cells of
pales. Microscopic examination showed the cells to be sinuate walled, the
crests and waves being thickened with the connecting parts thin and fairly
158   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    RENFREW


straight. The isodiametric cells are lobed all round, which indicated that the
species here is not A. sativa, A. barbata, or A.fatua, since the cells are too
slender76. Also found were grains of Lolium sp. cf. gaudium.

2 Tell Mureybat (on bank of Euphrates, N. Syria)77
  During the excavations of the site by Dr. M. N. van Loon in 1964 and
1965 finds of carbonized seeds were made, which have been studied by
Dr. van Zeist and W. A. Casparie. The levels containing the seeds have
carbon-14 dates ranging from 8050 to 7542 b.c. Among the eighteen types of
seeds identified cultivated plants are not represented, but of interest to us are
seeds of wild einkorn and wild barley which were discovered. The wild
einkorn is the two-grained variety T. boeoticum ssp. thaoudar and there are
no examples of T. boeoticum ssp. aegilopoides.
  The grains measured:

  Length       4-83 mm. (3-8-6-0 mm.)
  Breadth      1-30 mm. (0-9-1-6 mm.)
  Thickness    1-33 mm. (1-0-1-7 mm.)

They are slender, spindle-shaped seeds showing the greatest width in the
middle of the grain, while the ends are more or less pointed.
  The wild barley H. spontaneum is represented by a small number of grains
which are rather flat on the dorsal side, with a comparatively small thickness
and more or less angular cross-section. The maximum width of the grain is in
the middle; it tapers to a narrow base and the width decreases only slightly
towards the apex. The following measurements were obtained for these
grains:

  Length       5-44 mm. (3-8-67 mm.)
  Breadth      1-89 mm. (I-5-2-I mm.)
  Thickness    1-26 mm. (ro-i-6 mm.)

3 Tell Ramad (Syria)78
   The Pre-Pottery Neolithic B levels of this site, excavated in 1963, have
yielded remains of cultivated plants. Hulled two-row barley H. distichum,
emmer wheat T. dicoccumy einkorn T. monococcum, and club wheat T.
compactum and lentil Lens culinaris have been identified by van Zeist and
S. Botteina.

      Anatolia


1 Catal Htiyiik (Konya Plain)
  Vast quantities of carbonized grain were found in levels VI to II, c. 5850-
5600 b.c. Helbaek has identified the following domesticated plants: T.
monococcum. The grains are small79 and it is the two-grained variety which
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   159


is represented80. T. dicoccum. This species is represented by grains and inter¬
nodes. The grains are of exceptionally large size81, measuring up to 9 mm. in
length and with extraordinary short, broad internodes and coarse heavy
glumes82. T. aestivum. The grains were identified thus as shorter, broader and
fatter than normal emmer spikelets. The rachis segments remain united and
the glumes and keels disintegrate, revealing a naked wheat rather than
hulled or glumed wheat83. H. spontaneum. Present as “introduced weed”84.
H. vulgare var. nudum. Present in “great volumes”85. The grains seem to
belong to compact spikes, of the small-grained variety86. Of the pulses, peas—
Pisum elatius and P. sativum var. arvensis, vetch—Vida noeana (a common
variety in this locality) and V. ervilia, were also present87.

2 Mersin (Cilicia)
  The material was brought back to England from Mersin by Prof. V. G.
Childe, and is now at Reading University. Its stratigraphical position is
not well documented, but it is considered to belong to a level not later than
the Hassunah period88. The material has been identified by Helbaek as
dense-eared hulled six-row barley, the first known occurrence of this form.

3 Aceramic Hacilar (Plain of Burdur, west-central Anatolia)
  The finds have been set at about 7000 b.c. T. boeoticum. Typical grains
were found sporadically in the deposits89; a small form of T. dicoccum90;
naked six-row barley. Also present were several pulses, P. elatius91, vetchling
and lentil92.

4 Late Neolithic or Chalcolithic Hacilar
   The precise context for this material has not been reported, but the date is
quoted as c. 5800-5000 b.c.
   T. monococcum. Large quantities, chiefly twin-grained93; T. dicoccum.
Whole carbonized spikelets practically intact94; T. aestivum. Rachis frag¬
ments95; naked six-row barley was much cultivated. Both two- and six-row
hulled forms of barley were also found. The only pulse crop so far recorded
from this phase is lentils96.

5 Can Hasan (Konya Plain)
  Two deposits of grain were found in neolithic level 5, dated c. 5250 b.c.
The first consisted of hulled six-row barley, with grains measuring 57 X
3-2 X 2-5 mm. (average), and Triticum sp., the grains being too fragmentary
for more specific identification. The other deposit consisted of Pisum sativum
var. arvensis, the field pea which measured average 4-4 mm. diameter
measured along the hilum, and the length of the hilum averaged 19 mm.97
160   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     RENFREW




      Greece


1 Knossos (Crete)
  Finds of grain come from Stratum X which dates to c. 6100 b.c. Naked
hexaploid wheat, emmer and barley are present but no further details are
given98.

2 Ghediki (E. Thessaly)
   Finds from the Aceramic Neolithic levels which probably date between
6000-5000 b.c. yielded T. monococcum, the single-grained form, measuring
5-5 x 2-0 X 3-0 mm.99; T. dicoccum, the chief cereal cultivated, average
L. 5-2, B. 2-9, T. 2-5 mm.100; H. distichum average L. 5 8, B. 2-9, T. 2-3 mm.101;
H. distichum var. nudum L. 6-o, B. 27, T. 2 0 mm.102 The pulses represented
are Pisum sp. measuring average 3 9 X 3-5 X 3 3 mm., Vida sp. 4-5 X 4-4 X
4-4 mm. and L. esculenta L. 3-8 X B. 3-4 mm.103

3 Achilleion (S. Thessaly)
  Finds in the Aceramic Neolithic levels, 6000-5000 b.c., comprise T.
dicoccum average L. 6 0, B. 2-6, T. 2 7 mm.104, and Avena sp. L. 9-2, B. 3-3,
T. 2-5 mm.105 It was identified on the basis of the hairy covering of the
caryopsis revealed where the lemma and palea were broken away. Unfortu¬
nately the pales were broken at diagnostic places so that the species could not
be ascertained.

4 Sesklo (S. E. Thessaly)
   Two deposits of carbonized grains were found in the Aceramic levels
(6000-5000 b.c.). One deposit consists of T. dicoccum (av. L. 57, B. 3-0, T.
2- 3 mm.), H. distichum L. 5-5, B. 3-1, T. 2-0 mm. and some peas Pisum sp.
3- 8 X 3-4 X 3-2 mm. The second deposit also contained Pisum sp. averaging
3-9 X 3-2 x 3-2 mm.106

5 Argissa Maghula (Central Thessaly)
   Finds from the Aceramic layers consist of both grain impressions and
carbonized grains dating 6000-5000 b.c. The species represented are T.
monococcum (carbonized grain measured 60 X 23 X 27 mm.107); grain
impression of two-grained einkorn 6-4 x 3-0 x (2-5) mm.108 and impressions
of spikelet forks measuring (10-2) X 4 8; (n o) X (3-8); (9-0) x (3-0);
(83) X (4-0); (8-o) x (4-0); (7-0) x (5-0) mm.109 T. dicoccum represented by
impressions of spikelet forks: (iro) X (6-2); (5-0) x (5-0); (7-2) x (4-5)
mm. H. vulgare carbonized grain measured (4-8) X 2-6 x 2-0 mm.110 and
grain impression (6-8) X (3-8) mm.111 “//. vulgare L. polystichum var.
tetrastichum” is represented by the impression of a rachis (18-0 x (2-5) mm.
of which a single rachis segment measures L. 3-5 mm.112 cf. Panicum
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   161


miliaceum was represented by a small rounded seed 1-9 x 1-9 X ro mm.
with the embryo broken away113. Lentils, L. nigricans, represent the only pulse
found. The carbonized seeds measured av. 2-66 x 2-48 X 17 mm., and they
are thought to belong to the wild species on the basis of their size114.

6 Nea Nikomedeia (W. Macedonia)
   Carbonized grain and grain impressions found at this Early Neolithic
village dated c. 6200 b.c. These finds are not yet published in detail but a
preliminary report in Rod den and Rodden115 indicates that wheat, barley and
lentils were cultivated. T. monococcum, T. dicoccum, H. vulgare var. nudum,
Lens culinaris, Pisum sativum and Vida ervilia have been identified by van
Zeist among the carbonized material.

     Bulgaria


1 Azmaska Moghila (Maritza valley)
   Finds from the Early Neolithic levels (Karanovo I culture) at this site
yielded grains dating to c. 5000 b.c. The following species were identified by
Dr. Maria Hopf in material sent to the Berlin Radiocarbon Laboratory116, T.
monococcum, T. dicoccum, and T. aestivum, and the pulses, Lathyrus cf. cicera,
and V. cf. angustifolia.
   Samples were also examined by the author in the Stara Zagora Museum
in the summer of 1966117. The following species were identified: T. mono¬
coccum L. 5-2, B. 2-0, T. 2 5 mm., T. dicoccum, spikelet forks and grains, the
latter measuring 6-6 x 3*1 X 27 mm., and L. nigricans, which formed the
bulk of two deposits, averaging 27 X 2-4 mm.

2 Karanovo (Maritza valley)
   The earliest levels of this site (Karanovo I culture dating c. 5000 B.c.)
yielded large quantities or carbonized grain. These included T. monococcum
(both single and twin-grained varieties): the single-grained type measures
av. L. 5-9, B. 21, T. 3-1 mm., and the twin-grained form L. 6-2, B. 2 0, T.
2-8 mm. T. dicoccum is represented by spikelet forks, glume fragments and
grains. The caryopses measured L. 66, B. 3-1, T. 2 8 mm.



      Tentative conclusions and problems arising from the
      results outlined above

     1 Wheat

(a) Triticum monococcum. Its wild ancestor T. boeoticum is recognized at Tell
Mureybat, Ali Kosh (Bus Mordeh phase), Jarmo, and Aceramic Hacilar. The
domesticated form T. monococcum is not found very widely nor in great
162   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     Renfrew


numbers on these early sites. However, it is found at Ali Kosh (Bus Mordeh
phase), Tell es-Sawwan, Jarmo, £atal Hiiyuk—where it is very abundant118—
and also at Late Neolithic Hacilar119. In Europe it is present at Ghediki and
Argissa in Thessaly and Tell Azmak and Karanovo in Bulgaria. It is inter¬
esting to note that the two-grained variety derived from T. boeoticum sp.
thaoudar occurs at £atal Hiiyiik, Hacilar120, Argissa121, and Karanovo I122.
Helbaek has postulated on this basis that “west-central Anatolia was the
primary centre of conscious development and selection of the cultivar and
that this selection took place about 6000 b.c.”123 This certainly seems likely
for the two-grained variety, but the single-grained species occurs nearly a
millennium earlier in Iran, at Ali Kosh where it is associated with its wild
ancestor.
   One problem arises from the modern distribution of wild einkom: the
small usually single-grained “race” is characteristic of the southern Balkans
and west Anatolia, whilst the larger usually twin-grained race T. boeoticum
sp. thaoudar is found in south Turkey, Iraq and Iran124. Harlan and Zohary
stress however that wild einkom seems to be most at home in south-east
Turkey on the basaltic cobble, e.g. on Karacadag. Granted that the twin¬
grained race may have been domesticated in south Anatolia and spread into
Europe from there as a cultivable crop, it seems that we must postulate a
single-grained T. boeoticum sp. aegilopoides growing further east than its
modem distribution to account for the finds at Ali Kosh and Jarmo, con¬
siderably older than the other deposits considered. This brings us up against
a problem that at present seems difficult to solve: what were the distributions
of the wild cereal grasses at the time of the earliest plant domestications ? This
problem is not wholly or satisfactorily answered by plotting modern distri¬
butions, although these may be taken to indicate the general area for con¬
sideration.

(b) Triticum dicoccum. Whereas einkorn is domesticated by cultivation and
selection from wild einkom, emmer is slightly more complex in its make-up.
The wild species T. dicoccoides has two genome components AA and BB—the
A genome being derived from einkom, and B possibly from a species of
Aegilops, possibly Ae. speltoides125. The chromosomes of hybrid AB would be
doubled—since the fourteen chromosome hybrid would be sterile as the
chromosomes of the “A” and “B” genomes would not pair normally126—
giving rise to a new tetraploid wild species T. dicoccoides with genomes AABB.
T. dicoccoides probably arose long before man began to domesticate plants in
the Old World. The area in which it arose probably lies somewhere close to
the overlap in the distribution of Ae. speltoides and T. boeoticum, i.e. in a
broad arc from the south-east shores of the Black Sea, through Eastern
Turkey and down the shores of the East Mediterranean as far as Mt. Carmel.
The most easterly point of this arc lies at the headwaters of the river
Tigris.
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   163


   Two races of wild emmer have been distinguished: that found in Turkey,
Iraq, Iran and the U.S.S.R. is never found in great abundance, but often
occurs associated with wild einkom and wild barley as a minor component of
the grassland flora in the lower oak-woodland belt127. This race is rather
small, and not much larger than wild einkorn. The other race distinguished
has a distribution centred on the Upper Jordan valley, and is remarkable for
its large size and robustness. It occurs in massive stands on basaltic and hard
limestone slopes. Harlan and Zohary postulate that this race, now found in
the Upper Jordan valley, was the ancestor of the modern tetraploid wheats,
and that the Turkish-Iraqi race was of little importance for the early domesti¬
cation of cereals. It has been shown that this Turkish-Iraqi race is closest to
 T. timopheevi, a half weed, half cultivated wheat of Soviet Georgia and
Armenia128. It is of interest to note that the only palaeoethnobotanical find of
T. dicoccoides so far is from Jarmo in the Zagros region of Iraqi Kurdistan,
while at Beidha in Southern Jordan no wild emmer is present. The chief crop
there seems to have been hulled two-row barley transitional between the wild
and domestic forms. The emmer at this site however shows great variation in
size suggesting that it represents a period of “genetical transition”129.
   Emmer is the most widely found of all the early domesticated cereals.
Among the sites at present under consideration it is present at all except
Tepe Sabz, Tepe Guran and Mersin. In the early deposits at Ali Kosh and
Aceramic Hacilar the grains are small but characteristic130, at Beidha the
grains range in length from 5-10 mm. At <^atal Hiiyiik the grains are large, up
to 9 mm., with short, broad intemodes to the spikelets and heavy glumes131.
In Thessaly the average length of carbonized emmer grains of the Aceramic
Neolithic ranges from 5-2 mm. (Ghediki) to 60 mm. (Achilleion)132. In the
Maritza valley of Bulgaria the average length is larger than in Greece133 at
Azmaska Moghila, 67 mm. and at Karanovo I, 6-8 mm.

(c) Triticum aestivum.   Unlike T. monococcum and T. dicoccum, Bread wheat
has no wild ancestor. Its genome complement AABBDD is derived from T.
dicoccoides/T. dicoccum (AABB) with another Aegilops species. This was
probably Ae. squarrosa as Riley has indicated134. He suggests, on the basis of
high frequency of Ae. squarrosa in sample of wheat at Chalus on the Caspian,
that the initial hybridization may well have occurred under conditions of
cultivation. “If this were so”, he continues, “the first hexaploid wheat may
have been a free-threshing type resembling T. aestivum.” On the other hand,
McFadden and Sears have synthesized the hulled hexaploid T. spelta from
T. dicoccoides and Ae. squarrosa135 and T. aestivum is thought to have arisen
either by gene mutation in T. spelta or through natural crossing of different
forms of T. spelta™. The archaeological evidence here strongly suggests that
T. aestivum arose in the Near East, Anatolia and South Europe without any
connection with T. spelta, an association not recorded even in later prehistory
from this area. The earliest find of the species is at £atal Hiiyiik, 5800-5600
164   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    RENFREW


B.C., closely followed by Late Neolithic Hacilar. Further east it occurs in the
find from Tell es-Sawwan, 5800-5600 B.C., and at Tepe Sabz from about
5200 b.c.137 The earliest occurrence in Europe at Knossos at about 6000 B.C.,
followed by Tell Azmak138. Even in Central Europe, where both bread and
spelt wheat occur in archaeological contexts, the spelt follows bread wheat by
about a thousand years.
   T. compactum, closely related to T. aestivum, is known from Tell Ramad in
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B levels.

      2 Barley

(a) Two-row barley (Hordeum distichum). All varieties of two-row barley
derive from H. spontaneum, the wild, hulled two-row form, which is chiefly
distributed at present in an arc stretching from the northern tip of the Red
Sea via Israel, Syria, South Turkey, North Iraq, and South-west Iran on the
Persian Gulf139. It is this wild form, showing some evidence of cultivation,
which occurs at Ah Kosh (Bus Mordeh phase), Tepe Guran, Jarmo, Beidha,
and (Jatal Hiiyiik. The Beidha find is perhaps the most interesting: tens of
thousands of impressions of this species were found. They are ascribed to
this wild species partly by virtue of the brittle rachis, but the grains are very
much larger than the normal wild form, so that Helbaek140 has spoken of
“cultivated wild barley”.
   H. spontaneum has been identified among the grains found at Tell Mureybat.
At Jarmo, H. spontaneum has been identified both from impressions and
carbonized remains. Here finds of rachis fragments with three internodes
joined together suggest that the axis was no longer brittle—as a result of
cultivation of selection. This feature allows us to describe the Jarmo barley
as the earliest “domesticated” two-row barley yet found. It still corresponds
to the wild H. spontaneum in that the lateral florets are pedicellate and not
sessile, and the pales are not wrinkled141.
   Fully domesticated hulled two-row barley occurs at many sites of slightly
later date: Ali Kosh (Ali Kosh and Mohammad Jaffar phases), Tepe Sabz,
Tepe Guran, Tell es-Sawwan, Matarrah, Late Neolithic Hacilar, Ghediki,
and Sesklo.
   It is interesting to note that another form, the naked variety of barley,
occurs in extremely early contexts (Ali Kosh in the Bus Mordeh phase and
Beidha as well as Ghediki in Thessaly). Naked barley does not occur wild and
thus these forms must be considered as domesticates. Helbaek states142 that
“there is no evidence for two-row naked barley in antiquity”, and so identifies
the Beidha and Ali Kosh specimens as six-row. This seems unlikely, however,
when the rest of the material with which they were found is hulled two-row
barley, albeit the wild form. The Ghediki grain was considered two-row on
the basis of a similar association. Only finds of the rachis segments with
adhering pales would solve this matter satisfactorily.
               The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants   165


(b) Six-row barley (Hordeum vulgare).     The whole question of the origins of
six-row barley has been the subject of controversy since de Candolle and
Koernicke in the nineteenth century suggested that H. spontaneum might be
the ancestor of both the two- and six-row forms, although de Candolle also
suggested the possibility of a hypothetical wild six-row form which would
be the antecedent of the cultivated six-row form. Since then, allegedly wild
six-row barley has been found in Tibet, and in Palestine H. agriocrithon was
found in 1954. It has been accepted by many authorities as the long-sought
primitive, wild progenitor of cultivated barley143. No finds of H. agriocrithon
are yet reported from archaeological deposits.
   The earliest form of six-row barley yet found appears to be naked. A
curved (lateral) grain of naked six-row barley was found at Aceramic Hacilar,
and naked six-row barley occurs in great quantities at (Jatal Hiiyuk, c. 5600
B.C.144 It appears also at Tell es-Sawwan, c. 5800-5600 b.c.145 Thus it appears
(if we disregard the Ali Kosh and Beidha finds noted above) that naked
six-row barley comes into its own as a cultivated crop chiefly in Anatolia, and
that if it is derived from H. spontaneum the three mutations giving a firm
rachis, fertile lateral grains and naked caryopses had occurred as a con¬
sequence of domestication at least before 7000 b.c. (Aceramic Hacilar). Finds
of hulled six-row barley occur slightly later: at Ali Kosh (Ali Kosh phase).
Tell es-Sawwan, and Tepe Sabz in the Near East, Mersin, Late Neolithic
Hacilar and Can Hasan in Turkey, and Argissa-Maghula in Thessaly. This
again is curious, for if six-row barley was derived from the wild hulled H.
agriocrithon one might expect to find the hulled form domesticated even
earlier. This does not appear to be the case from the palaeoethnobotanical
material so far examined.
   So far the archaeological evidence supports the case for H. spontaneum as
the ancestor of both two- and six-row barleys. The domesticated two-row
barleys seem to have emerged first at Jarmo (hulled) and possibly at Beidha
(hulled) and in the Ali Kosh phase at Ali Kosh (naked). The hulled form was
widely cultivated from about 6000 b.c. in the Near East and Southern
Europe. The earliest six-row barley (naked form) appears in Anatolia around
7000 b.c. and was established in Thessaly after 6000 b.c. Hulled six-row
barley occurs by 6000 b.c. at Ali Kosh (Ali Kosh phase) and Argissa in
Thessaly. It is subsequently found at Tepe Sabz, Tell es-Sawwan, Mersin,
Late Neolithic Hacilar, and Can Hasan. It thus appears that there was no
significant time lag between the emergence of domesticated two- and six-row
forms, and that both occur, in their naked and hulled varieties, very shortly
after domestication.

     3 Broom corn or proso-millet (Panicum miliaceum)

Only one possible find of this species is known for the period in question. It
was from Argissa-Maghula146, with seeds measuring 1-9 X 1-9 X i-o mm.
166   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     RENFREW


   The wild ancestor of the species is not known147 although Helbaek has
suggested that the Abyssinian wild species Panicum callosum Hochst., which
closely resembles it morphologically, may be involved148. The earliest find
previously recorded was from the Jemdet Nasr period in Mesopotamia,
dated around 3000 b.c.149 This form of millet was widely grown in Central
Europe from around 2000 B.C.160

      4 Oat (Avena sp.)

Finds of wild oat grains are not unusual at these early sites—at Ali Kosh (Ali
Kosh and Mohammad Jaffar phases), Beidha, ‘Amuq A. Only at Beidha has
the species been identified, as Avena ludoviciana. The find at Achilleion
would normally have been considered wild, but for the exceptionally large
size of the caryopsis, measuring 9-2 X 3-3 X 2-5 mm. As the diagnostic parts
of the lemma were broken away, more precise identification was not possible.
But on size alone it looks as though tiiis might have been a domesticated form.
If so it is very much earlier than any other find. A. strigosa and A. sativa were
cultivated in central and northern Europe at the beginning of the first millen¬
nium B.c.151

      5 The pulses

(ci) Pea.  Finds of the field pea, Pisum sativum var. arvensis and the rough-
seeded purple pea, P. elatius, are quite common on these early sites. The
former is known from Jarmo, £atal Hiiytik, and Can Hasan, and is probably
the species represented in the Aceramic levels at Ghediki and Sesklo in
Thessaly. P. elatius is known chiefly from Hacilar, and in smaller quantity at
£atal Hiiyuk. Bertsch and Bertsch consider P. elatius as the wild species from
which the cultivated field and garden peas derive152. Whether any of these
finds can be considered fully domestic is an open question, but field peas
were certainly cultivated in the Late Neolithic of Europe153.

(b) Lentil.    The lentil is the most widely found form of pulse seed on these
early sites. It occurs at Jarmo and Tepe Sabz in the Near East, at Aceramic and
later Hacilar in Anatolia, at Ghediki, Argissa and Nea Nikomedeia in Greece,
and at Karanovo I and Tell Azmak in Bulgaria. The domestic form. Lens
esculenta, is probably derived from the wild L. nigricans, and is distinguished
from it by the larger size of its seeds. Hopf154 describes the Argissa finds as L.
nigricans on the basis of the size of the carbonized seeds, 2-66 X 2-48 X 17 mm.
The finds from Ghediki are larger (3-8 x 3-4 mm.) and may be domesticated.
At Tell Azmak, lentils formed the bulk of two sizeable deposits, but the seeds
measured only 27 x 2-4 mm. which suggests that they may not have been
domesticated.
                The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants    167

(c) Vetch. The early finds of vetch belong chiefly to wild species, but it is
interesting to note that Vida ervilia was already known at £atal Hiiyiik.
It became an important crop later in Anatolia and neighbouring regions155.
Unspecified vetch and vetchling are known from the Mohammad Jaffar phase
at Ali Kosh and the Sabz phase at Tepe Sabz. Blue vetchling was found at
Jarmo, and V. narbonensis at Beidha. V. noeana, a common weed in the
vicinity of £atal Hiiyiik was also found in the neolithic deposits besides V.
ervilia, and a large-seeded vetch was present in Aceramic levels at Ghediki in
Thessaly. It is interesting to note that the horse-bean, V. faba, was not culti¬
vated until later156 although its wild ancestor was present in the Beidha finds.

     6 Flax

Two finds of flax seeds are known from this early period, from Tell es-
Sawwan and Tepe Sabz. The former find contained a seed measuring
4-0 X 2-4 mm. corresponding to Linum usitatissimum, and comparing well
with the previous earliest finds from Arpachiyah and Tell Brak (seed length,
3-84 and 4-03 mm. respectively) reported by Helbaek157. Fibres from textiles
at £atal Hiiyiik have been identified variously as flax and wool, and in the
absence of any finds of seeds, the presence of flax at that site cannot yet be
regarded as established. The wild ancestor of flax, L. bienne, occurs naturally
in the Kurdish foothills, and it seems likely that it was domesticated in this
region, and subsequently spread into temperate Europe158. It is not possible
to say whether flax was first cultivated for its oily linseeds or for the fibres of
its stem.



       Conclusion

The finds discussed above comprise the evidence as it now stands which
bears on the domestication of the earliest crop plants of the Old World (see
Table 1). They provide a somewhat complex picture of early husbandry,
which cannot conveniently be summarized in a few words. The wide variety
of crops at many early sites over a large area is, however, an obvious feature.
  Many of the finds here listed have been reported only in a preliminary way,
and few of them illustrated in detail. We do not have full details and measure¬
ments of the earliest forms represented, and their publication will be of great
importance. More finds will be needed as well, before we can understand the
full range of variation between the wild species, on the one hand, and the
cultivated varieties on the other. As yet no systematic study of “intermediate”
forms has been possible, and the rather close similarity in some cases between
the domesticates and their prototypes offers little hope of documenting in
detail the process of domestication as fully as Mangelsdorf has been able to do
for maize.
7—DOPAA
168   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants                        RENFREW


   The complex picture of early plant husbandry documented by these finds
suggests that the “Early Neolithic” period which they represent was preceded
by a lengthy period of experimentation before these crops—which still form
the basis of our agriculture today—were finally selected and domesticated.
The great lack in our knowledge here arises from the absence, up to now, of
finds of crop plants from the period immediately preceding what we now
know as the “Early Neolithic”. Although there are indications that both the
Natufians and the Karim Shahir people were exploiting food plants, we do
not know what these were. Future finds, therefore, may not only fill in the
details of the outline picture already available for the “Early Neolithic”
period: they may set the beginnings of agriculture back a millennium, or
several millennia, earlier than present evidence allows. Undoubtedly the
most valuable step towards increasing our understanding of early agriculture



                                                                                             Hulled 6-row barley 1
                                            Wild Einkorn




                                                                        Naked 2-row barley
                                            Einkorn
                                            Wild Emmer
                                            Emmer
                                            Bread wheat

                                                                                             Naked 6-row barley            Millet
                                            Wild 2-row barley                                                                             Lentil
                                                                                                                                                   Flax
                                                                                                                     *->            as
                                                                                                                     as              V
                                            Hulled 2-row barley                                                      0              P-i   Vetch
           Sites              Dates—b.c.

Ali Kosh (B.M.)                7500-6750    X   X   —   X   —
                                                                X   —
                                                                        X?                   _           _           _     _        _     _   _ _
Ali Kosh (A.K.)                6750-6000    - - - X - - X               -                    X - Wd -                               -     -   -    -

Ali Kosh (M.J.)                6000-5600    - - - X - - X               -                    - - Wd - - - X —
Tepe Sabz (Sabz)               5500-5000    - - - - X - X               -                    X - - - - X X X
Tepe Guran                     6200-5500                        X X
Tell es-Sawwan                 5800-5600    - X - X X - X               -                    X X                     -     -        -     -   —
                                                                                                                                                   X
Tell Mureybat                  8050-7542    X                                                                                                 X    X
Tell Ramad                     c. 7000      - X     -   X C     -   X   —                    -           —           —     —        _     _
                                                                                                                                          X   _

Jericho, P.P. Neo.             c. 7000      -   X   -   X   -   -   X   —                    -           —           _     —
                                                                                                                                    X X X _
Beidha, P.P. Neo. B.           c. 7000      -   -   -   X   -   X   -   X?                   -           -           Wd —           — —
                                                                                                                                        X          _

Jarmo                          c. 6750      X X X X             X                                                                   X X X          —

Matarrah                       c. 5500
‘Amuq A                        c. 5750
Mersin, E. Neo.                c. 5750
Catal Hiiyiik, VI-II           5850-5600    -   X   —   X X     X   —   —                    —           X           —     _
                                                                                                                                    X     _
                                                                                                                                              X _
Aceramic Hacilar               c. 7000      X                                                                                       X     X   X    _
Ceramic Hacilar                5800-5000    -   X   —   X   X   —
                                                                    X   —
                                                                                             X X                     _     _        _ X _ _
Can Hasan, L. Neo.             c. 5250
Knossos, Stratum X             c. 6100      _   _   _
                                                        X X     _ B _                        _ __                    _     _              _   _
Aceramic Ghediki               c. 6-5000    -
                                                X   —   X   —   _
                                                                    X   X                    _ _                     _     _        X X X          _

Aceramic Sesklo                c. 6-5000
Aceramic Argissa               c. 6-5000    —
                                                X   —
                                                        X   —   _   _   _
                                                                                             X _                     _     X        _     X   _    _

Aceramic Achilleion            c. 6-5000
Nea Nikomedeia                 c. 6200
Karanovo I                     c. 5000
Azmaska Moghila, E. Neo.       c. 5000


W = Wheat unspecified      B = Barley unspecified       Wd = Wild form                                               C = Club wheat


Table i  Finds of domesticated plants and related species from the Near East
      and Europe before 5000 b.c.
                The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants        169

would be the excavation of more sites from this shadowy period from the
tenth to the eighth millennium B.C., and the application of flotation and other
techniques to recover such plant evidence as they may contain.
   None the less, we should not undervalue the great advance which has taken
place in our knowledge in the period, less than two decades, since Professor
R. J. Braidwood’s pioneering excavations at Jarmo. At first solely through the
work of Hans Helbaek, and more recently with that of other scientists also, our
knowledge of Early Neolithic plant husbandry has reached the stage that the
developments documented through the archaeological finds can be compared
(and sometimes contrasted) with the developments put forward on less
pragmatic grounds, by plant geneticists. These comparisons have already
proved very fruitful, to both disciplines, and it seems very likely that they will
lead, over the next few decades, to an agreed and perhaps fairly complete
understanding of the domestication of food plants in the Old World159.



           Notes

       1Helbaek, H. (1963). Palaeo-Ethnobotany, in Higgs, E. S. and Brothwell,
        D. R. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London, pp. 180-5.
      2 Harlan, J. R. (1967). A wild wheat harvest in Turkey, Archaeology, 20
        (3).
      3 Helbaek, H. (1952). Early crops in Southern England, Proc. Prehist. Soc.,
        18, pp. 194 ff.
      4 Helbaek, H. (i960). Cereals and Weed Grasses in phase A, in Braidwood,
        R. J. and Braidwood, L. J. Excavations in the Plain of Antioch, I., Appen¬
        dix II, Chicago, p. 540.
      5 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
      6 Helbaek, H. (1959). How farming began in the Old World, Archaeology,
        12, p. 188.
      7 Helbaek, H. (1966). Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and
        Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20, p. 350.
      8 Helbaek, H. (1960b). The Palaeoethnobotany of the Near East and
        Europe, in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. Prehistoric Investigations in
        Iraqi Kurdistan, Chicago, p. 104.
      9 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). The distribution of wild wheats and
        barleys, Science, 153, p. 1078.
     10 Peterson, R. F. (1965). Wheat. New York. pp. 10-12.
     11 Peterson, R. F. (1965). ibid.
     12 Peterson, R. F. (1965). ibid.
     13 Peterson, R. F. (1965). op. cit. p. 85.
     14 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. fig. 8, p. 356.
     15 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
     16 Helbaek, H. (1966b). Pre-Pottery Neolithic farming at Beidha, Palestine
        Exploration Quarterly, 98 (i), p. 62.
     17 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 108.
     18 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
     19 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
     20 Bell, G. D. H. (1965). The comparative phylogeny of the temperate
        cereals, in Hutchinson, Sir J. (ed.) Essays on Crop Plant Evolution, Cambridge.
     21 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 113.
170   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants      RENFREW


      22 Hopf, M. (1962). Bericht uber die Untersuchung von Samen und Holz-
         kohlenesten von der Argissa-Magula aus den prakeramischen bis mittel-
         bronzezeitlichen Schichten, in Milojcic, V., Boessneck, J., and Hopf, M.
         Die deutschen Ausgrabungen auf der Argissa-Magula in Thessalien. Bonn.
         p. 102.
      23 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). Geschichte unseres Kulturpflanzen.
         Stuttgart, p. 85.
      24 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). A report on recent finds of carbonized cereal grains
         and seeds from Prehistoric Thessaly, Thessalika, 5, p. 23.
      25 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      26 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The prehistory of southwestern
         Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp. 147 ff.
      27 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
      28 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 101 ff.
      29 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
      30 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
      31 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigation.
      32 Helbaek, H. (1964). First impressions of the £atal Hiiytik plant husbandry,
         Anatolian Studies, 14, p. 122.
      33 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
      34 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      35 Helbaek, H. (1965). Early Hassunan Vegetable at es-Sawwan near
         Samarra, Sumer, 20, pp. 45 f.
      36 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      37 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      38 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      39 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      40 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
      41 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 357.
      42 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      43 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      44 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid. Helbaek (1966) op. cit. p. 357.
      45 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      46 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      47 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 354.
      48 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 358 and fig. 12.
      49 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      50 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      51 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
      52 Meldgaard, J., Mortensen, P. and Thrane, H. (1963). Excavations at
         Tepe Guran, Luristan, Acta Arch., 34, p. 112, n. 17.
      53 Helbaek, H. (1965). ibid.
      54 Helbaek, H. (1959b). Domestication of food plants in the Old World,
         Science, 130, pp. 365 ff.
      55 Helbaek, H. (1960b). ibid.; Helbaek, H. (1960c). Ecological effects of
         irrigation in Ancient Mesopotamia, Iraq, 22, pp. 186 ff.
      56 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      57 Helbaek, H. (1959). op. cit. p. 184.
      58 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
      59 Helbaek, H. (1959). op. cit. p. 187.
      60 Helbaek, H. (1959b). op. cit. fig. 8; Helbaek, H. (1959). op. cit. p. 189.
      61 Helbaek, H. (1959). ibid.
      62 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
      63 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 109.
      64 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
      65 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      66 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
          The archaeological evidence for the domestication of plants    171

 67 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 68 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 69 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 70 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 71 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 72 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
 73 For details of these finds, see Hopf, M., this volume, pp. 355-9.
 74 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
 75 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
 76 Helbaek, H. (i960), ibid.
 77 van Zeist, W. and Casparie, W. A. (1968). Wild Einkorn, wheat and barley
    from Tell Mureybit in Northern Syria, Acta Bot. Neerl., 17 (i),pp. 44-53.
 78 van Zeist, W. and Botteina, S. (1966). Palaeobotanical investigations at
    Ramad, Annales Arch. Arabes Syriennes, 16, pp. 179-80.
 79 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
 80 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 351 and fig. 3.
 81 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
 82 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
 83 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 354 and fig. 6.
 84 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
 85 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 357.
 86 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
 87 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
 88 Helbaek, H. (1959b). ibid.
 89 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 90 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
 91 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
 92 Helbaek, H. (1966b). op. cit. p. 63.
 93 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
 94 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 353.
 95 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. fig. 7.
 96 Helbaek, H. (1961). Late Bronze Age and Byzantine crops at Beycesultan
    in Anatolia, Anatolian Studies, 11, p. 82.
 97 Renfrew, J. M. (1968). A note on the neolithic grain from Can Hasan,
    Anatolian Studies.
 98 Evans, J. D. (1964). Excavations in the Neolithic settlement of Knossos
    1957-60, Part I, Annual Brit. Sch. Arch. Athens, 59, pp. 132 if. See
    identifications by Helbaek.
 99 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). op. cit. p. 22.
100 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
101 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
102 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
103 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). op. cit. p. 23.
104 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
105 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
106 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
107 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
108 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
109 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid,
no Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
in Rodden, R. J. and Rodden, J. M. (1964). A European link with £atal
    Hixytik: uncovering a seventh millennium settlement in Macedonia.
    Part I, Illustrated London News, nth April, pp. 565 ff.
112 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
113 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
114 Hopf, M. (1962). ibid.
115 Rodden, R. J. and Rodden, J. M. (1964). ibid.
172   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants     RENFREW


      116 Kohl, G. and Quitta, H. (1966). Berlin Radiocarbon Measurements II,
          Radiocarbon, 8, pp. 27 If.
      117 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigation.
      118 Helbaek, H. (1964). op. cit. p. 121.
      119 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      120 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      121 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
      122 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigations.
      123 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
      124 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
      125 Peterson, R. F. (1964). op. cit. p. 83.
      126 Peterson, R. F. (1965). ibid.
      127 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). op. cit. p. 1079.
      128 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
      129 Helbaek, H. (1966b). ibid.
      130 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 352 and fig. 4.
      131 Helbaek, H. (1966). ibid.
      132 Renfrew, J. M. (1966). ibid.
      133 Renfrew, J. M. Unpublished investigations.
      134 Riley, R. (1965). Cytogenetics and the evolution of wheat, in Hutchinson,
          Sir J. op. cit. p. 106.
      135 Peterson, R. F. (1965). op. cit. p. 85.
      136 Peterson, R. F. (1965). op. cit. p. 100.
      137 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 354.
      138 Kohl, G. and Quitta, H. (1966). ibid.
      139 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). op. cit. p. 1075.
      140 Helbaek, H. (1966b). op. cit. p. 61.
      141 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 108.
      142 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 356 and fig. 8.
      143 Bell, G. D. H. (1965). op. cit. p. 84.
      144 Helbaek, H. (1966). op. cit. p. 356 and fig. 8.
      145 Helbaek, H. (1964). ibid.
      146 Hopf, M. (1962). op. cit. pp. 104-6.
      147 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). ibid.
      148 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 113.
      149 Helbaek, H. (1959b). op. cit. p. 371.
      150 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). op. cit. p. 90.
      151 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 114.
      152 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). op. cit. p. 165.
      153 Bertsch, K. and Bertsch, F. (1949). op. cit. p. 168.
      154 Hopf. M. (1962). pp. 104-6.
      155 Helbaek, H. (1961). ibid.
      156 Helbaek, H. (1959b). op. cit. p. 371.
      157 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 193.
      158 Helbaek, H. (1960b). op. cit. p. 114.
      159 The author gratefully acknowledges the help she received from Dr. D.
          Theochares (prehistoric grain from Thessaly), Professor D. Dimitrov,
          Dr. G. Georgiev, Dr. Mikov, and the Director of the Stara Zagora
          Museum for the earliest Bulgarian material; and Mr. David French for
          the neolithic material from Can Hasan.
      RALPH RILEY

      Evidence from phylogenetic relationships of the types
      of bread wheat first cultivated


      The interpretation of phylogeny from interchanges

The comparison of chromosome structure in different plant genotypes
provides a means of assessing relative phylogenetic positions, and in the
wheat group interchange differences are most useful for this purpose. In the
origin of an interchange, segments are exchanged reciprocally between
chromosomes that are usually completely unrelated in their genetic functions.
Thus two chromosomes, with the linearly arranged order of segments
ABCDEF and UVWXYZ, might undergo an exchange to give rise to
chromosomes with the new structures ABCXYZ and UVWDEF. Chromo¬
somes with structures altered in this way may become fixed in populations
derived from the individuals in which they first occurred. In some instances it
is possible to recognize experimentally which is primitive and which derived.
  Differences between individual plants or plant populations, due to inter¬
changes, can be recognized from the behaviour of chromosomes at meiosis
in hybrids between them. Where the parents differ by the presence of an
interchange, instead of all the chromosomes associating in pairs, or bivalents,
four chromosomes associate together in a quadrivalent. These four chromo¬
somes will be the two from one parent with the original structure and the two
from the alternate parent with the interchanged structure. In this way inter¬
change differences can be readily recognized and used to trace phylogenies
and work of this kind has been carried out in wheat1.
  The method can be explained by discussing the relationships of the four
wheat varieties, Chinese Spring, V220, Holdfast, and Cappelle-Desprez.
From meiosis in hybrids the following relationships were established:


  Chinese Spring X V220—no quadrivalent — no interchange difference,
  Chinese Spring x Holdfast—one quadrivalent = one interchange differ¬
    ence,
  Chinese   Spring x Cappelle-Desprez—two        quadrivalents = two     inter¬
    change differences,
174    Dart H Domestication and exploitation of plants   RILEY


  Holdfast X Cappelle-Desprez—one         quadrivalent = one     interchange
      difference.
  The relationships established from meiosis in the hybrids can be illustrated
diagramatically, using one or two lines to represent one or two interchange
differences respectively, as follows:
                                   Holdfast




                          /
                    Chinese Spring=Cappelle-Desprez
                        V220

  Clearly the chromosome structures of Chinese Spring and V220 are more
like that of Holdfast than like that of Cappelle-Desprez. Although there is no
internal evidence as to which is primitive and which derived, it is apparent
that a chromosome structure like that of Holdfast must have been intermedi¬
ate to whichever of the other two states is derived.



        The archetypic chromosome structure of wheat

Triticum aestivum, the most widely cultivated wheat, has 42 chromosomes
that were derived in evolution from the 28-chromosome emmer wheat,
T. turgidum, and from the 14-chromosome, weed grass Aegilops squarrosa.
The complete sets of chromosomes of both these species are present in T.
aestivum, but, because many forms of wheat differ from each other due to the
presence of interchanges, their original ancestral structure may have been
modified.
  Obviously interest attaches to the recognition of forms of T. aestivum with
the primitive chromosome structure. This requires the establishment of
42-chromosome forms in which there are no interchanges relative to
emmer in the chromosomes derived from emmer, and in which among the
remaining chromosomes there are similarly no interchanges relative to the
chromosomes of Ae. squarrosa. From the study of meiosis in hybrids, T.
aestivum ssp. vulgare variety Chinese Spring was shown to have no inter¬
change differentiation relative to either T. turgidum ssp. dicoccoides or Ae.
squarrosa. Consequently the ancestral chromosome structure of the 42-
chromosome wheats is present in Chinese Spring.



        Forms of T. aestivum

 There are a number of subspecies of T. aestivum, the 42-chromosome wheat,
 that are separated on the basis of major morphological distinctions, although
                     Evidence of the types of bread wheat first cultivated   175

the differences between them are generally simply inherited2. These sub¬
species are:

  T. aestivum ssp. vulgare          bread wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. comp actum       club wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. spelta           large spelt or dinkel wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. sphaerococcum    Indian dwarf wheat
  T. aestivum ssp. macha
  T. aestivum ssp. vavilovi

   Faced with this range of variation an interesting question concerns the form
that was first available for agricultural use, since presumably all diverged
from a single prototype at the 42-chromosome level. Any subspecies which
does not possess the primitive chromosome structure can presumably be
dismissed from this role, so that it is important to ascertain how widely the
primitive structure is distributed.



      The distribution of the primitive chromosome structure

The primitive chromosome structure of T. aestivum ssp. vulgare Chinese
Spring was used as a standard against which the structures of other forms
were compared in hybrids. The results were as follows:

Number of interchange
 differences from the
  primitive structure       Subspecies                  Comments
        None              vulgare          one form from Kashmir (in 1930)
                          spelta           two forms from Baktiari region of
                                           Iran (in the 1950’s)
         One              vulgare          seven forms, European, Chinese,
                                           Indian, and American
                          spelta           two European, and three Baktiari
                                           forms
                          compactum
                          vavilovi
         Two              vulgare          one French form
                          macha
                          sphaerococcum

  So far as this limited exploration goes, only subspecies vulgare and spelta
have the primitive chromosome structure and there is thus no evidence that
any of the other subspecies could have been available to the first cultivators.
Of course a wider survey might reveal that some of the other subspecies have
similar ranges of structural variation to those that have been observed in
vulgare and spelta. Arguments supporting some other subspecies as the most
176   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    RILEY


primitive would, however, certainly be aided by the demonstration in it of
forms with the primitive structure, since the present evidence favours vulgare
or spelta.
  The only forms of spelta with the primitive structure were collected in the
Baktiarian area of Iran by Professor H. Kuckuck3. Other forms of spelta from
the same area differed from the primitive structure by a single interchange, as
did the two central European forms studied. If the same interchange proves
to be present in the European and Baktiarian forms, then it must have existed
formerly in a continuous population, or in a common pool, that is now relict
in these widely disjunct areas. If the interchanges were all the same it would
demonstrate the antiquity of spelta, showing that the European and Iranian
forms did not arise independently from vulgare.
  The two forms of vulgare with the primitive structure both came from the
more easterly range of the subspecies. Chinese Spring probably came from
the Chungking region of China, while the other variety, V220, was obtained
from Kashmir. Kashmir is within the area in which 42-chromosome wheat
could have been first formed—this area being delimited by the distribution of
Ae. squarrosa. However the present results can be taken as no more than a
hint that the primitive chromosome structure in vulgare may have been
better preserved in the eastern part of its present area of distribution.
  Work on chromosome structures has so far shown that either vulgare or
spelta may have been the first 42-chromosome form. This approach is not
capable of discriminating between them, but a study of the geographical
distribution of the primitive structure, in both forms, might well provide
information that would assist the choice.



      Notes

      1 Riley, R., Coucoli, H. and Chapman, V. (1967). Chromosomal inter¬
        changes and the phylogeny of wheat, Heredity, 22, pp. 233-48.
      2 Mackey, J. (1954). The taxonomy of hexaploid wheat, Svensk. hot.
        Tidskr., 48, pp. 579-90.
      3 Kuckuck, H. (1959). On the findings of Triticum spelta L. in Iran and on
        the arising of Triticum aestivum-types through crossing of different
        spelta-types. Wheat Inf. Serv., 9-10, pp. 1-2.
        WILLIAM C. STURTEVANT

        History and ethnography of some
        West Indian starches

The traditional classificatory rubrics of western science and everyday dis¬
course are becoming less suitable as we learn more about the range of alterna¬
tive possibilities in the relations between man and the living world around
him. Concepts such as “domestication”, “cultigen”, “ornamental”, “agricul¬
ture”, “horticulture”, or “irrigation” refer to bundles of cultural, biological,
and historical variables which can now be seen to occur in various combina¬
tions in different places and different periods, combinations which are
inadequately classified by these and many similar terms. It is probably time to
abandon the broader rubrics in order to concentrate on defining and analysing
more specific variables, examining their changing associations in different
instances and their functional and historical interrelations with features from
other spheres such as sociological, economic, ecological, and biological
ones.
  Classificatory criteria such as whether a species can survive without
human care, whether a species has been genetically modified through man’s
activities, or the extent to which his biotic environment has been intentionally
or unintentionally changed by man, are cultural as well as biological. The
cultural variables are of several major sorts, including for plants, (i) ethno-
scientific features, i.e. those related to folk botanical concepts, including folk
taxonomies; (2) techniques of protection, selection, planting, cultivation,
collection, and harvesting; (3) techniques of processing, after collection or
harvesting; (4) storage and preservation methods; (5) utilization or con¬
sumption techniques. In addition there are of course relevant or correlative
features of general technology, economics, settlement patterns, social organiz¬
ation, religion and mythology, and so forth.
  While I think the time has come for ethnographers, archaeologists,
geographers, and historians to make an intensive effort to sort out and
specify the cultural variables involved in the care, modification, and use
of plants and plant products by human societies everywhere, I am not
prepared myself to search the vast quantity of pertinent literature. Rather, I
want to examine here one narrow example: the shifting associations of
178   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant


processing and utilization techniques with three species in one relatively
restricted culture-area over a period of about 450 years1.
  The region involved is the West Indies, especially the Greater Antilles—
the islands of Puerto Rico, Jamaica, Hispaniola (present-day Haiti and the
Dominican Republic), and Cuba—with some attention to some of the Lesser
Antilles (Dominica, Barbados, St. Vincent, the Virgin Islands, and the
Grenadines). When the Spanish arrived here in the 1490s, the Greater
Antilles, except for a few corners, were densely populated by groups of
Arawakan-speaking Indians largely sharing the same culture; for convenience
I refer to these as “Taino”, without distinguishing the closely similar “Sub-
Taino”. This label is unambiguous, even though it may be etymologically
inappropriate as Sauer has recently objected2—his suggested replacement,
“(Island) Arawak”, is inappropriate because of possible confusion with the
culturally quite distinct Arawak of the South American mainland. The
Lesser Antilles were occupied by a different cultural group for whom the
label “Island-Carib” has become standardized (the men’s form of speech
here contained many Carib loan words, yet the language, like Taino, belonged
to the Arawak rather than the Carib family).
  Although many islands in the Lesser Antilles were depopulated early in the
colonial period, social and cultural continuity with the aborigines has been
maintained through two surviving Island-Carib groups, one on Dominica
and the other, displaced, in British Honduras. The Taino population of the
Greater Antilles was almost entirely destroyed within thirty years of
Columbus’s first discovery, and the few remnants were rapidly assimilated,
genetically, socially, and culturally, into the newly-forming creole societies of
European and African origin which replaced the Indians. Despite what was a
biological and cultural disaster, there is a surprising continuity of Indian
cultural traits. This is most evident in the names and uses for domesticated
and wild plants, where even modern ethnographic data often help us to
interpret and fill out the description of aboriginal culture which can be
reconstructed from documentary and archaeological sources. Of course, many
new plants and new techniques were introduced in the subsequent centuries;
but this has been a long period of documented history through which many
of the changes can be traced in detail.
  The dense and highly developed neolithic-level aboriginal Taino popula¬
tion was primarily supported by intensive agriculture, probably of the
swidden type3. The crops belonged to that tropical South American complex
which emphasized vegetative reproduction and the use of roots (in the
ordinary rather than the technical botanical sense of this last word)4. The most
important were Manihot esculenta (manioc) and Ipomoea batatas (sweet-
potato). Other “root” crops were Xanthosoma sagittifolium (yautia, an
aroid), Calathea allouia (liren, of the arrowroot family), and probably a
species of Canna. Maize was present but of secondary importance, as were the
other seed crops normally found with it in the aboriginal New World: one
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      179

or more beans (probably Phaseolus lunatus and P. vulgaris) and a squash or
pumpkin (perhaps Cucurbita moschata). Other domesticated food plants
included Capsicum sp(p). (red pepper), Arachis hypogaea (peanut), and, in
Jamaica but not Hispaniola, Ananas comosus (pineapple). Many other plants
were used for food or other purposes, and several of these were domesticated.
However, there is often doubt as to species identification and degree of
domestication. In recent centuries many important domesticates originating in
tropical Africa and South-east Asia have been introduced, among them
bananas, yams, taro, sugar cane, millet, ackee, mango, and breadfruit. Many
utilization techniques have also changed, partly through influences from
European, West African, and non-Antillean American Indian cultures.



      Manioc

Manioc is today an important food crop in most parts of the tropical world.
All other species of its genus are wild plants of the American tropics. Manihot
esculenta Crantz is usually supposed to have first been domesticated in north¬
eastern South America; the principal botanical specialist on the plant now
thinks that Mexico-Guatemala is at least as likely to have been the centre of
origin. The starch-rich tubers of this plant contain varying amounts of a
toxic cyanogenetic glycoside. Those varieties which have litde, or where it is
concentrated in the rind which is removed in peeling, are called “sweet”;
varieties with higher amounts more evenly distributed are called “bitter” and
require special processing techniques to remove or render the poison harmless.
Formerly, the sweet varieties were distinguished as M. aipi, M. dulcis, or
M. palmata, and the bitter ones as M. utilissima. It is now known that the
toxicity is not associated with morphological features of the plant, and that it
often varies with soil and climatic conditions and the age of the plant. All
varieties are now considered to belong to one species, M. esculenta5.
  The methods which the Taino were using to prepare food from bitter
manioc when Europeans first arrived in the sixteenth century can be specified
with some certainty, using descriptions by contemporary Spanish observers6,
comparative data on modern South American Indian ethnography, a little
archaeological evidence, and survivals into modem times of artifacts and
terminology among the non-Indian successor populations of the West
Indies.
  The Taino raised manioc in large hills constructed in swidden fields. An
important characteristic of the plant is that, like many wild crops but unlike
most cultigens, storage techniques are relatively unimportant because it can
be harvested over a very long period. Thus the tubers were taken out of the
ground with a digging stick as they were needed, anywhere from ten months
to three years after the cuttings had first been planted7. These tubers were
then peeled with mussel or scallop shells, and pulped by grating. A grater
i8o   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant


made from a stone covered with shark skin yielded a finer flour for a better
quality bread, called “jaujau”; in nineteenth-century Cuba a board sheathed
in shark skin was still used as a grater, and the finest bread was known there
into the present century as “casabe de levisa”, “shark cassava”8. Pulp for the
ordinary bread, “casabi”, was more coarsely grated. Here there are some
difficulties in determining the nature of the graters. Judging from com¬
parative evidence9 one would expect a grater made from a board with inset
stone chips (or, less likely, with inset or carved wooden points, or inset fish
bones, thorns, or teeth), and there are indeed archaeological examples of two-
handled hardwood graters with inset stone chips from Hispaniola and Cuba,
and the type survived into modern times in Cuba, Puerto Rico, and
Dominica10. In addition, monolithic basalt graters with one face roughened by
pecking are relatively common in Hispaniola archaeology (although they do
not occur in Cuba); this type seems unnecessarily difficult to construct, but it
is partially paralleled by graters of rough granite slabs documented for
South America11. But neither of these types is unequivocally described in
sixteenth-century written sources on the Taino. The only detailed early
description (of a type other than the one covered with shark skin) is difficult
to understand: Las Casas tells us that the Indians grate manioc roots “on
some rough stones on a kind of frame, which they call guariqueten, the
penultima short, which they make of poles and canes placed as a base for some
palm leaves or coverings, which are like deer skins; finally, in this way they
grate it in a trough so that the mass does not fall”12. Does “rough stones”
refer to a monolithic or stone-chip grater (as the archaeological and comparative
ethnographic evidence would imply), used in a trough made of, or set on, a
basketry and palm leaf mat ? Or is this a grater made of stone chips set in a
basketry framework, perhaps tied or stuffed with palm fibre (a more logical
interpretation, but a type otherwise entirely unknown), and used in a
(presumably wooden) trough? With Las Casas’ “guariqueten” should
be compared with the modern Puerto Rican Spanish term “guariquitin”,
meaning “a plaited cane bed used by the poor”; the same word occurs in the
Dominican Republic, as “guarequeten” or “guariquiten”, but here defined
as a large wooden vessel for grated manioc pulp—by an author who also cites
the pertinent passage in Las Casas, making one wonder whether his definition
applies to modern usage or is an interpretation of Las Casas’ ambiguous
description13.
   In any case, the grated pulp was next left overnight in a trough covered
with palm leaves. The next day it was stuffed into cylindrical basketry
presses, loosely plaited of palm leaves or tree bark, seven to nine feet long and
the diameter of a man’s arm or thigh, with a “handle” on each end. This
artifact, here called “sibucan”, is clearly the same as the diagonally-twilled
basketry manioc press with a loop on each end, usually called “tipiti” in the
literature on South America where it is still widespread14. One end of this
press was suspended from a tree branch, and weight applied to the other end
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches     181

—either several stones hung from it, or two or three women seated on the
outer end of a pole some twelve feet long run through the lower loop of the
press with the inner end inserted in a hole low in the trunk of the tree from
which the press was hung. As the press stretched, the juice, called “hyen”,
was expressed through the interstices of the basketry. Untreated, this juice
was poisonous, and there are records of its use by Cuban and Hispaniola
Indians in committing suicide. Boiled to eliminate the poison, the juice was
used as a sauce for flavouring other dishes. The modern Dominica Island-
Carib settle out starch from the milky fresh expressed juice, and either
return this to the meal or use it to make fine cassava cakes; the Taino may
also have done this, for there is a sixteenth-century mention of “anaiboa” as
manioc “flour” from which a fine porridge, ‘‘like blanc-mange”, was made
with milk, while in modern Cuban Spanish “naiboa” is the term for the
white, starch-bearing expressed manioc juices, and a related term, “anaiboa”,
“naiboa”, or “neiboa” today means “sticky” in the Dominican Republic15.
   The damp pulp from which the poison had been removed by pressing,
was sifted through the “hibls”, a basketry sieve made from thin strips of cane,
in order to break up the larger lumps and remove fibres and ungrated bits.
The sifted pulp or flour was placed on a hot “buren”, a large circular flat
pottery griddle an inch or so thick, attached with clay or mud to three or four
stones supporting it over a fire. The damp meal coagulated with the heat and
the cakes thus formed were turned over with thin wooden paddles after
cooking for about fifteen minutes on one side, to cook on the other. For
ordinary casabi, the meal was spread over the buren to a depth of an inch and
a half, leaving an inch or two space around the rim; the finished cake was
about a third of an inch thick. The jaujau type was spread much thinner.
When removed from the griddle the cakes were flexible, but they became
very hard after drying in the sun for several hours to a day or two, and would
then last two or three years if kept dry. Before eating the cake was broken up
with the fingers and the bits softened by dipping in a pot of liquid.
   The Spanish in the Antilles rapidly adopted cassava as a staple food and
substitute for wheat bread, and before 1550 they had introduced screw presses
to Hispaniola as more efficient substitutes for the basketry sibucan16. From
very early in the colonial period Jamaica was especially important as a centre
of production and export of cassava17. In the seventeenth century many of the
French colonists in the Lesser Antilles also preferred cassava to European
wheat bread. Here the roots were pulped on graters of pierced copper a foot
and a half long and eight or ten inches broad, attached to a board, with the
lower end resting in a vessel. An improved tool was also in use: a large wheel
with the grater on the circumference, crank-turned by two Negro slaves while
a third applied the roots (an almost identical rotary grater was also replacing
the manual grater in Brazil by 1648, among those who could afford it)18. The
pulp was pressed in two ways: placed in cloth sacks squeezed beneath a pole
with one end inserted in a hole in a tree (a stump is illustrated) and stone
182   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   sturtevant


weights placed on the opposite forked end, which took seven or eight hours,
or else, more commonly, the juice was expressed in an hour by placing the
pulp in a wooden “canot” some four feet long, one and a half feet wide, and
three feet deep, with holes in the sides and a fitted board lid on which were
placed stones pressed down by a similar forked branch. The pressed flour
was passed through an Indian-made basketry sieve called “hebechet” (the
term, “hebichet”, and the artifact survive among the Dominica Island-
Carib)19. A round cast-iron plate about a half inch thick (among the Indians,
a pottery griddle) was heated over a fire. On this the sifted meal was spread
about an inch thick, which was turned to cook on the other side after it had
formed a cake, then removed and sun dried (PI. iv a)20. A similar process was
used in the 1730s and 1740s to produce “le pain des Negres & des Sauvages”
in Haiti: the roots were pulped on a copper grater, pressed for twenty-four
hours to remove the poisonous juice, and cooked as flat thin cakes on an iron
plate21.
   There are also good eighteenth-century descriptions of Jamaican tech¬
niques. Here the roots were washed, scraped, pulped on an iron grater in a
tub or trough, then pressed in hair, linen, or palmetto bags placed on flat
stones and squeezed with a plank inserted in a notch in a tree trunk with
weights on the other end. The “farine” or “farina” was then dried in the sun,
pounded in a large wooden mortar, and baked over a fire on “a flat, broad
round iron, commonly called a baking-stone”, “bestrewed with the sifted
meal to whatever size or thickness people pleased to have the cakes made: this
agglutinates as it heats, grows gradually harder, and when thoroughly baked,
is a wholesome well-tasted bread” which was eaten buttered while hot or
used in puddings. A similar process was evidently used in Barbados. The
expressed juice was boiled, the viscous scum skimmed off, and the remainder
diluted with water and drunk or used as a sauce. The scrapings from the
fresh roots of bitter manioc were applied for the treatment of ulcers. The
poisonous juice as it fermented became infested with “worms” called
“topuea”; these the Indians and Negroes dried and powdered and stealthily
transferred, as a supposedly deadly poison, from beneath the poisoner’s
thumb-nail to a victim’s food bowl22.
   In the modern West Indies, manioc roots are processed in two ways. One
of these is a direct descendant of the Indian and Colonial method; essentially
the same techniques are described for Cuba, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, and the
French islands23. The roots are washed and peeled, then pulped by rubbing
them against a rapidly revolving circular grater. The pulp is placed in bags
or baskets and pressed to remove the juice—in Jamaica, at least, with the
simple lever press of a plank with one end inserted in a notched tree trunk
and the other end weighted with rocks, resting on the basket of pulp on a pile
of stones. The meal is sifted to remove fibres and ungrated bits, then cooked
on flat metal plates over a fire, constantly stirred to yield cassava meal or
formed in flat cakes which bake into cassava bread. One type of tapioca is
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      183

obtained by settling the starch out of the expressed juice, decanting the fluid
and heating the starch on flat pans until the individual grains burst and then
coagulate into tapioca pellets. Boiling the juice into a syrupy consistency
destroys its poison, and it is then used as a peppery sauce known as “cassa-
reep”.
  The second process yields starch for industrial purposes or for two forms
of tapioca; the same technique is used also in Brazil, Malaya, and elsewhere.
It involves machinery of varying complexity, but the process is basically the
same everywhere: “it is a wet milling process, water being used to convey the
starch throughout the system and to wash away impurities. Briefly, it in¬
volves washing the roots to remove foreign matter, destroying their cellular
structure so as to liberate the starch, screening off the fibrous material,
separating the starch from the water-soluble impurities and protein by
gravitational means [decanting the fluid], and drying”24. The result is known
as cassava starch or tapioca flour. Flake tapioca is produced by heating the
damp starch on metal plates until the starch grains swell and coagulate into
irregular flakes; to make pearl tapioca, the damp starch is shaken on a cloth
frame to form it into pellets, then toasted on metal plates25.
  A very simple variant process is used in the Jamaican countryside, where
the pulp from scraped and grated roots is mixed with water, “strained through
a towel held by two persons”, the milky liquid collected beneath and settled
for an hour or two, and the water poured off leaving the starch which is
either dried briefly, salted, and baked into “pot bammie”, or dried several
days, broken up in a mortar, sifted, mixed with flour, and cooked into “dump¬
lings”26.
  Manioc is an extremely important food crop in Africa, where it was
evidently introduced from Brazil in the latter sixteenth century. But the
American utilization techniques did not travel with the plant: the grater is
rare and the tipitl absent; manioc starch and tapioca are usually unknown
and cassareep is nowhere prepared27.
  On the other hand, the method for removing starch from grated manioc
pulp by washing it and settling out the starch grains is not recorded from
the Greater Antilles during the contact period or immediately after, and was
undoubtedly introduced there by the Spanish. It is an ancient European
method for getting starch from wheat28, and this may well be the source. It
might also be a European introduction of an Amazonian Indian process, for
Brazilian Indians in the seventeenth century got “vipeba” or “farinha fresca”
by settling from water in which manioc roots had soaked for four or five days29.
Historical investigations of early South American Indian techniques are
required, and the Antillean data warn us not to project modern ethnographic
information back into the past without using the historical sources which are
available.
184   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant




      Arrowroot

True arrowroot, Maranta arundinacea, is an herbaceous perennial with
rhizomes rich in starch. These are however covered with scales containing an
acrid or bitter substance which must be carefully peeled off before use, and
the cellular structure of the rhizomes is so tough that more thorough grinding
or maceration to release the starch grains is required than is the case with
manioc30.
   All species in the genus are American, and M. arundinacea itself occurs
wild in Brazil, northern South America, and perhaps Central America. It is
now widespread in cultivation throughout the tropics of both hemispheres31.
However, although many tribes of the South American tropical forest have
cultivated it in recent times as a food plant32, the history of its domestication
has not yet been investigated and we cannot be sure that it was cultivated
anywhere by pre-Columbian Indians.
   The species is frequently listed in modem sources as one of the plants
cultivated by the aboriginal Taino. This is an error; correcting the record by
an examination of how the mistake became established, and stating the
evidence against the supposition, provides a simple example of the necessity
for returning to original sources for the history of domestication.
   The best way to identify the plants which the sixteenth-century Spanish
sources mentioned as used by the Taino, is to compare the morphological
characterizations of the early writers with modern botanists’ descriptions, and
to compare the early Taino names with modem Antillean Spanish popular
plant terminology and its referents. The latter is nearly always the crucial
point, for the early authors’ plant descriptions are usually inadequate, while
the Taino names they give for useful plants, wild or cultivated, were mostly
adopted by the Spanish invaders.
   The early accounts describe two West Indian plants which modern
authors have erroneously identified as arrowroot. One of these is the “liren”
or “lleren”, said to be a cultivated plant with a starchy root which was eaten
raw or cooked33. This was definitely Calathea allouia, for the description of the
plant fits this species well enough and the same uses and the same or similar
names are attested for it in the modern Antilles: “lleren, leren, liren, lairen”,
or “leiren”, in Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic34. Botanists
agree with this equation, but the anthropologists Loven and Friederici were
misled by the older synonym Maranta allouya into thinking that the plant was
M. arundinacea, and this misidentification was followed by Roumain and
Rouse. The same error was made by Sapper, who even added “hier heimisch”.
Sauer pointed out that the early descriptions of liren “clearly” do not refer
to M. arundinacea “but may refer to Calathea allouia”, yet he left the question
open and has recently included arrowroot in a list of aboriginal Antillean
domesticates under the name “araru” (see below on this term)35.
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches   185

   The other plant sometimes identified as arrowroot is one which Peter
Martyr called “cabaioes” and merely described as “like onions”; Oviedo
wrote the same Taino name as “cauallos”, which he says resemble the liren
but are somewhat larger, “grow in poor and thin soils. . . . [and are] whole¬
some food and enjoyed by the Indians. It is a wild fruit and it comes up and
grows through the care of nature alone”36. The last point would seem to
eliminate M. arundinacea, which does not occur wild in the Greater Antilles
except as an escape from cultivation37. Probably this was a species of Canna;
Xanthosoma violaceum has also been suggested, but this seems less probable if
Oviedo’s “like liren” means the whole plant, rather than just its edible
underground portion38.
   These are evidently the only contact-period descriptions which might
refer to arrowroot. Furthermore, it is surely significant that nowhere today
does a Taino name for it survive. The common names in use are all (with one
barely possible exception) of clearly post-Columbian application. In Spanish¬
speaking areas the plant is usually known as “yuquilla” (“little manioc”) or
“sagu” (“sago”, a term of Malayo-Polynesian origin); other names are
“raiz americana” (“American root”), “maranta”, “salop” or “salep” or
“sulup”, and “touola” or “tulola”39—only the last is of unknown origin, and
it does not occur in the sixteenth-century literature. The French name
“herbe aux fleches” is apparently a loan-translation from a now-lost Island-
Carib name. The most common term is the English “arrowroot” and its
derivatives, Spanish “arrurruz”, Portuguese “araruta”, Dutch “arraroot” or
“arrowroot” or “pijlwortel”, German “Pfeilwurz”, and a great variety of
terms used in South-east Asian languages whose shapes are so close to the
English word that this must be their ultimate source40. Martius suggested
that the English term is derived by folk etymology from mainland Arawak
“aru-aru”, “starch of starch” (“aru” or “haru” being the name for both
manioc and moriche palm starch)41; but as we shall see, the signification of
the English name is clear enough so that its resemblance to Arawak must be
coincidental. Bartlett, on the other hand, tentatively suggested that the
English name derives from “araru” or a similar form in an Indonesian
language42, although the American origin of the plant plus the etymology of
the English name means that the direction of borrowing was just the reverse
of what Bartlett suggests.
   The earliest recognizable description of the plant in the West Indies was
published by du Tertre in 1654. According to him, soon after a French
governor had made peace with them in 1641 the Island-Caribs, evidently
largely from Dominica, brought to him in Guadeloupe “une plante qu’ils
appelloient en leur langue, l’herbe aux fleches (ie n’ay pu retenir le mot
Sauvage)”. The leaves and flowers of this plant as described by du Tertre
agree well with modern botanists’ characterizations of Maranta arundinacea.
Unfortunately he does not say whether the Indians cultivated the plant. But
he does specify that “the savages value this plant highly, and not without
186   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   sturtevant


considerable reason; because we discovered by everyday experience the rare
and admirable qualities which it possesses: its root pounded and applied to
wounds of arrows poisoned with manchineel [Hippomane manchinella\,
entirely allays the venom and even stops incipient gangrene, relieves all kinds
of inflammation, as also the swelling caused by stings of the wasps of
Guadeloupe, which is rather dangerous”43. A similar source is indicated by
Sir Hans Sloane, who in 1696 described “Indian arrow root” under the Latin
phrase Canna Indica radice alba alexipharmaca, adding that he had seen the
plant in 1687-8 in gardens in Jamaica and other Caribbean islands and had
heard that it grew wild in Dominica; he also cited a description by Gomara,
first published in 1552-3, which merely says that the Caribs of Santa Marta
in Colombia used “the juice of the root” of an undescribed plant as an anti¬
dote for poisoned arrow wounds, for blindness, and for curing the evil-eye.
In 1707 Sloane described the plant at greater length—a description recognized
by modern botanists as referring to Maranta arundinacea—summarized du
Tertre’s account of its properties, and added:

  This plant was first brought from the Island Dominica, by Colonel James
  Walker, to Barbados, and there planted. From hence it was sent to Jamaica,
  being very much esteem’d for its Alexipharmack qualities. That Gentleman
  observed the Native Indians used the Root of this Plant with success,
  against the Poison of their Arrows, by only mashing and applying it to the
  poison’d wounds.44

  According to Barham, a Jamaica physician writing before 1711, the plant
Sloane labelled Canna Indica was called “arrow root” because it was first
known as an Indian antidote for poisoned arrow wounds, for which the juice
was taken internally and the bruised root was used as a poultice on the wound.
“This was discovered by an Indian, taken after he had wounded an European
with one of these poisoned arrows, whom they tortured until he promised to
cure him, which he did effectually with the root of this plant.” Barham cited
two cures by applications of the bruised root, of bites by a poisonous black
spider, one on the finger and another a woman bitten “at the necessary-
house, upon the buttock”, and a case of accidental poisoning in which two or
three men died but one was saved by drinking two glasses of juice from
bruised arrowroot root. He also considered arrowroot an efficacious remedy
for several other ills:

  I have seen this root frequently given in malignant fevers with great
  success, when all other things have failed. When I make up lapis con-
  trayerva for my own practice, I always put in a good quantity of it. I have
  given it decocted, but it is best in powder, which causes sweat; the dose is
  from a drachm to two. ... It hath no manner of ill taste or smell; it works
  by sweat and urine, and yet it is a great cordial; it provokes the terms, and
  clears lying-in women; it drives out the small-pox or measles; and if it was
                   History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      187

  candied as eringo-root, it would make a pleasant preserve, for it possesses
  the like prolific virtues.45

   Before 1750 arrowroot was also used medicinally in Barbados—“the juice
of this [root] is exceeding cold, and, being mixed with Water, and drunk, is
looked upon to be a Preservative against any Poison of an hot Nature”—but
also “out of this Root is made likewise the finest starch, far excelling any made
with Wheat” and this latter is the earliest mention of a non-medicinal use. By
 1774 in Jamaica, although still used chiefly as a medicine, the roots were also
“washed, dried, and reduced to an impalpable powder” which “makes an
excellent starch; and has been used as a succedaneum for the common sort”,
and the plant is one of a list of “wholesome and palatable viands”. The first
description of the method of converting the roots into starch was published
in 1787. Relying on his own observations in Jamaica, William Wright des¬
 cribed Maranta arundinacea as a plant of the “gardens and provision
grounds”, the year-old roots of which were dug, washed, “and then beaten in
large deep wooden mortars to a pulp” which was thoroughly stirred in water
in a large tub. The fibrous parts were removed and discarded, and the milky
water strained through “a hair sieve, or coarse cloth”. The starch was settled
out, the supernatant water drained off, and the starch remaining rewashed
and settled again, then “finally dried on sheets in the sun”. Wright does not
mention the uses of this starch, although “a decoction of the fresh roots makes
an excellent ptisan in acute diseases”. Somewhat later, arrowroot starch was
described as used in Jamaica as “a warm alexipharmic”, to “resist the force
of poisons”, and “administered in infusions to the sick”, but also “it has been
sometimes known to be used for food when other provisions were scarce”46.
   Although specimens of arrowroot seeds were first sent to England (from
Mexico) before 1732, the first large shipment of starch, presumably from
Barbados or Jamaica, is dated 1799. Shortly thereafter, the starch in milk was
recommended as an infant food, having “lately been introduced into
England”. Its use here is illustrated by the fact that a writer in 1846 cited
Barham and Wright in order to suggest that a plant known in England as a
source of edible starch might also be useful as an antidote for poisons. In the
same year a French pharmacologist noted that what the English called
“Indian arrow-root” had been imported from Jamaica for a dozen years or so,
that he had determined this starch to be exactly the same as that of “Maranta
arundinacea cultivated in the other Antilles”, and the plant had also been
transported to India where it was grown for commercial starch. In fact, it may
have been grown for starch in Bengal as early as 1813 (although there are Old
World plants, such as Tacca pinnatifida, which have also been called “arrow
root”)47.
   In 1823 a Danish pharmacist in St. Croix, Virgin Islands, reported that
arrowroot was there grown for its starch which had long been generally used
as a household and hospital remedy “against catarrhal illness, diarrhoea,
188   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   STURTEVANT


dysentery, and in every other illness where mucilaginous remedies are
employed” (use as an antidote not being mentioned), and that it was con¬
sidered a household necessity as a sick food (mixed with Madeira or Port,
sugar, and cinnamon or nutmeg), for starching clothes, and as a substitute,
presumably in puddings, for sago, tapioca, and “Persian salep”. In St. Croix
the starch was prepared by washing the roots after the scaly rind was removed,
pulping them in a grating mill or by pounding in a stone mortar, mixing the
pulp with water and pouring this through a sieve into a second vessel, re¬
peatedly washing and sieving the mass remaining in die sieve, and settling the
starch out of the mixture which passed through the sieve. After the super¬
natant water was poured off the settled starch, the latter was mixed with
fresh water and again settled out, and this process of washing and setding
was repeated until the supernatant water remained clean. The starch was
finally spread out to dry in the sun. The resulting product, if properly washed
and unadulterated, was preferred to manioc starch. “The [arrowroot] salop
which is prepared on the Danish and English islands is generally unadulter¬
ated; that which comes from Puerto Rico, on the other hand, is uncleanly
prepared and mixed with cassava and other kinds of starch, reportedly from
bananas and plantains, potatoes, and other starch-bearing plants.” During
the 1830s there is another, briefer, report of arrowroot starch used in sick
diets and for starching clothes in the Virgin Islands, a statement that the
plant was grown in large quantities in a few localities in Cuba, and a report
that small amounts were raised by Negroes in Antigua48. Thus before 1840
the plant was grown in English, Danish, French, and Spanish areas of the
Antilles, and the starch was exported to Europe at least from English and
French islands.
   In the middle of the last century the chief exporters of arrowroot starch
were Bermuda and St. Vincent. In Bermuda the roots were grated against
a hand-operated wheel, the circumference of which was sheathed with a
grating surface of punctured “tinned iron”. The pulp was washed in a
mechanically turned cylindrical sieve, the starch setded out, rewashed and
sifted several times, and the caked starch broken up and dried in the sun.
Although a few years before 1845 all mills in Bermuda were hand-operated, in
that year a large establishment used horse-driven machinery, and about
400,000 lb. of starch per year were produced on the island. In the same year
the methods used in St. Vincent were well described. Here the roots were
peeled by hand, ground to a pulp in a mill consisting of two pairs of brass
rollers, and the starch washed from the pulp in large copper cylinders with
sieve bottoms containing rotating paddles driven by a water wheel. The
starchy water was strained, settled, washed and resettled several times, and
the starch sediment finally sun dried and packed. This latter method was in
use in Bermuda by the 1880s. In St. Vincent the initial peeling was aban¬
doned, and a rotating cylinder set with saw blades replaced the brass rollers49.
   Arrowroot has been cultivated for its starch, sometimes for export, in many
                   History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      189

places in recent years: especially in various West Indian islands and in
Bermuda, but also in Brazil, the Guianas, Mexico, West Africa, Natal,
Madagascar, Mauritius, Reunion, India, Ceylon, mainland South-east Asia,
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Guam50. Apparently only in South-east Asia
are the whole rhizomes used as food, prepared by boiling or roasting51
(probably harvested young so as not to be too woody, although the starch
content is also lower then).
   However, large scale cultivation of the plant survives only in St. Vincent in
the Lesser Antilles, which has exported some five to ten million pounds of
starch yearly over at least the last thirty years, over two-thirds of each year’s
export going to the United States, under one-third to the United Kingdom,
and the remainder mostly to other West Indian islands. In the most modern
starch factory in St. Vincent, the roots are first washed, then cut into bits
which are rasped and crushed to a pulp which is mixed with water and passed
in a continuous flow on to vibrating sieves; the residue on the sieves is re¬
crushed and re-sieved twice; the “starch milk” which passes through the
sieves is pumped into a centrifuge separator, the starch from this is washed,
sieved through fine wire cloth, and re-centrifuged, and the resulting starch is
mixed in water with sulphurous acid (which retards fermentation) and then
settled in tanks from which the supernatant water is later drained, the top
layer of the sediment hosed away to remove the remaining fibres, and the
starch finally dried in a mechanical steam drier. The starch is exported as an
ingredient (sometimes a minor one) for arrowroot biscuits, and for use in
puddings and dietetic foods; some arrowroot starch is used as a face powder
base and in glues52.
   Earlier uses have survived in West Indian folk medicine: the roots are
pounded for poultices for wounds and ulcers in Dominica, and washed,
grated, and boiled to make a gruel for treating diarrhoea in Jamaica; in the
Grenadines arrowroot is even still used as an antidote for manchineel poison¬
ing, not of course from poisoned arrows, but a suspension of the starch taken
internally when the fruit has been eaten and starch poultices applied to
external burns from manchineel juice53.
   The historical development in the West Indies seems clear: an Indian
antidote for poisoned arrow wounds, adopted by non-Indians as an antidote
for other poisons then extended to other medicinal uses, then used as a food
for the sick at about the same time as it became a source of starch for other
purposes with starch gaining techniques very likelv transferred from those
used with manioc.



      Zamia

Zamia, the most widespread and variable of the New World cycad genera,
consists of twenty to thirty poorly understood species ranging from peninsular
190   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   sturtevant


Florida through the Greater Antilles, southern Mexico, Central America, and
northern South America as far as the Mato Grosso of Brazil. The plants have a
crown of pinnate evergreen leaves ranging up to a metre or more in length
which spring from a short cylindrical or tuberous stem. This starch-rich stem
sometimes weighs several pounds, and is subterranean in all the eight or so
closely similar Antillean species. Evidently the stems, leaves, and seeds of all
species are poisonous—probably a toxic glycoside is involved; the variety of
production techniques shows that either fermentation or washing of the
pulped stems eliminates or reduces the toxicity sufficiently to allow human
consumption54.
   The fundamental source for the identification of Zamia as a plant used by
the Taino is Las Casas’ sixteenth-century account of Hispaniola. His descrip¬
tion of “guayaga” is a good characterization of the Zamia plant: “the roots
are like fat squills; the shoots and leaves which come from them out of the
ground, about two or three spans [long], somewhat resemble the dwarf fan-
palms of Andalusia, although they are narrower and smoother and more
delicate than those of the dwarf fan-palm”. The identification is clinched by
the name (reported also by an earlier source, as “guaiega” described as
“round roots . . . like truffles, and larger”), which survives as a name for
Zamia in the modern Dominican Republic in the form “guayiga” or
“guayiga”. Another name, “guayaro” and variants, is given by Las Casas and
others for a wild “root” eaten by the Indians of Hispaniola; this may also
have been Zamia, since one early source describes its preparation as strikingly
like that used for guayaga, and since variants of “guayaro” survive today in
Cuba as names for Zamia. However, in modern Puerto Rico the latter name is
applied to a wild yam, Rajania cordata, and both Las Casas and Peter Martyr
seem to distinguish the two names as referring to different plants in early
 Hispaniola55.
    According to Las Casas, the guayaga was an important food resource of the
Taino of the Higuey region of Hispaniola. They collected the stems from wild
 plants, grated them “on some rocks rough like rasps” (presumably monolithic
 or stone-chip graters), and shaped the pulp into balls which were put in the
 sun for one to three days until they began to rot and became blackish and
 wormy. The balls were then flattened into small cakes which were baked on a
 clay griddle supported with stones over a fire (evidently the buren used for
 cooking cassava)—“and if it is eaten before it becomes black and is not full of
 or with some or many worms, the eaters will die”.
    The historical connections between the Indian preparation of Zamia in
 Hispaniola and the modern methods there and elsewhere in the Antilles are
 most readily traced through eighteenth-century descriptions of Puerto Rican
 methods. 1 wo processes were used along the south coast of that island, where
 Zamia was a food of the poor and in times of famine: the stems were grated,
 the pulp allowed to rot in water, then dried and sifted, and formed into small
 leaf-wrapped loaves roasted on hot coals, which were black when eaten or;
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches      191

else the grated pulp was piled to rot, breed worms, and dry out into a dark red
mass which was then ground to a powder and shaped into small loaves56. A
similar process is reported for the mid-nineteenth century: the pulp from
grating was heaped up and covered with banana leaves for three or four days
while it fermented and worms grew in the interior; the mass was then broken
open and the worms gradually “disappeared” as it dried into a coarse, dark
flour, which was ground up and used to make small loaves. But by this time
Zamia was also used here for starch production with techniques probably
transferred from those used to gain manioc starch: the stems were washed and
grated, the pulp stirred in water and the liquid strained through a cloth or
sieve, the starch settled out and rewashed two or three times before being sun
dried. The starch was used only for starching clothes. The pulp and juice
from grating and the wash-water from starch production were all used to
treat sores, ulcers, and buboes57. Today wild Zamia still yields a scarcity food
in parts of Puerto Rico, where the peeled stems are grated on a tin grater, the
pulp being caught in a bowl of salted water and then squeezed dry in a rag,
salt added, and formed into small leaf-wrapped loaves which are baked in
ashes58. The rotting stage which provided the main link with Indian methods
has been dropped, although the use of the pulp for small leaf-wrapped loaves
eaten in times of food scarcity has persisted at least since the eighteenth
century.
   For the Dominican Republic we have only nineteenth- and twentieth-
century reports of the use of Zamia. Soldiers of the French army besieged in
the city of Santo Domingo in 1808 presumably heard that bread could be
made from the plant, for they attempted to transfer the techniques they knew
for making cassava, but with fatal results because squeezing the juice out of
Zamia pulp will not remove the poison. We have two good accounts of the
preparation of starch from wild Zamia here, a brief one dated 1872 and a very
full one from 1952-4. The stems are washed, peeled (now, but not in the
nineteenth century), and grated on a piece of sheet metal roughened with
nail holes and loosely attached to a wooden paddle. The pulp is then washed
three times in a burlap sieve suspended from four posts, the starch-bearing
water settled for twenty-four hours and decanted leaving the starch which is
rewashed and strained through broadcloth, and finally settled again. The
starch is dried for several days suspended in cloth wrappings which are
occasionally twisted and squeezed. The remaining hard ball is broken apart
and spread out during a final sun drying. The starch is mainly sold in the
cities for starching clothes (in the nineteenth century it was also exported to
Curasao and St. Thomas for the same purpose). But some of it is eaten,
combined with various ingredients in several recipes, although leaf-wrapped
loaves are not reported from this island. Here there is no survival of the
aboriginal Hispaniola processing techniques, but simply continuity in the
food use of the same wild plant59.
   Zamia starch was sold in Jamaica markets in the early nineteenth century.
192   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants    sturtevant


some of it evidently imported from the nearby Cayman Islands60. It is still
used for food in the Caymans, a clear porridge being made from starch
extracted by grating on perforated tin graters, washing the pulp, and settling
the starch from the wash water61. In western Jamaica Zamia grows wild, but it
is also cultivated to some extent in household gardens—the only report from
the Antilles of cultivation of the genus for food or starch. Two other starch-
yielding plants, tous-les-mois (Canna sp.) and arrowroot, are also grown here,
and the starch gaining process is the same for all three: the stems are peeled,
washed, and grated on a metal grater perforated with nail holes; water is
added to the pulp which is then squeezed in a cloth, and the starch-bearing
water collected in a bowl where the starch settles out. The water is then
poured off, and salt and lime juice added to the starch to bleach it before it is
dried in the sun. It is eaten as a gruel, cooked with water, milk, and sugar62.
   For Cuba we have only brief statements in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries that starch was extracted from Zamia stems by grating, washing,
settling, and drying, and was used for starching clothes, for industrial pur¬
poses, and to make a sweetmeat. In eastern Cuba, the starch (?) of Zamia is
also used in medicinal baths63. There are only brief references, beginning in
1838, for the use of Zamia starch as food and for starching clothes in the
Bahamas64.



      Conclusion

We have examined first a true cultigen of aboriginal times, taken over by the
European and African settlers of the West Indies; second, a plant only
doubtfully aboriginally domesticated and that not in the Greater Antilles but
introduced there from the Lesser Antilles by Europeans; and third, a wild
plant of the region used by both Indians and their successors. All three have
starch-rich “roots” which are not used for food after simple cooking, but
rather require special preparation techniques either because they are toxic or
because they are tough and woody, or both.
   The aboriginal preparation techniques for bitter manioc and Zamia were
quite different, although they shared two artifacts, the grater and the buren.
Both are toxic; with manioc, the poison was removed by squeezing out the
juice, whereas with Zamia it was removed by fermentation. The Europeans
introduced a new technique for gaining starch, by washing the pulp and
settling the starch out of the wash-water. This technique was apparently first
applied to manioc, from which it was transferred to Zamia. In the latter case
the new method also was an effective substitute for fermentation as the means
for eliminating the toxicity of the root. Thus the preparation techniques for
both plants changed, yet remained at least as similar to each other; in recent
folk usage they still share a similar grater, and now also the washing and
settling technique, but the buren has been dropped from Zamia preparation
                  History and ethnography of some West Indian starches        193

methods. The Europeans also introduced a new plant, arrowroot, at first not
for its starch but for medicinal purposes adopted with the plant from the
Indians of the Lesser Antilles. Once adopted the use changed, starch for food
and other purposes being gained from the roots by techniques transferred
from those used with manioc. One result was that the new plant was in¬
corporated into the peasant agricultural repertoire to such an extent that
modern anthropologists have erroneously assumed that it, like the manioc its
uses now resemble, is a survival of a Taino domesticated food plant.
   This case-history demonstrates—what is not in doubt, but is often over¬
looked—that there need not be a constant association between plants, the
artifacts used in their preparation, and the uses made of the products. The
use of the buren or griddle in the preparation of a product from a wild plant
is perhaps relevant to the interpretation of archaeological pottery griddles as
evidence on the history of manioc domestication. The change from a medicinal
to a food use of one of these plants reminds us that any ethnobotanical field
study shows a remarkable number of non-food uses of plants, for medicine,
for the manufacture of artifacts, and for a wide variety of other purposes (e.g.
personal adornment and perfume; weights and measures; punk and tinder;
fish poisoning; various symbolic, magical, and religious associations). Any of
these uses may be the basis for domestication or selection, even though
ultimately a plant may be used mainly or entirely as a source of food.
   The West Indies, as the first site of modern European colonial expansion,
may be unusual in the extent of historical documentation available. But in
much of Africa, Asia, and Oceania, as well as the New World, there are also
historical records covering several centuries. Too often, modern ethnographic
data are used to interpret the archaeological evidence in regions where
historical documents would help to peel off the major recent changes due
directly or indirectly to this European expansion.



      Notes
      1 This paper is part of a long-term study of the historical economic botany
        of the Antilles and Florida; in particular, the section on Zamia is a
        summary of the Antillean chapter of a monograph to deal with the
        utilization history of this genus throughout its range. The author is
        especially indebted to S. W. Mintz, the late J. M. Goggin, and J. W.
        Thieret, for bibliographic and other suggestions.
      2 Saucer, C. O. (1966). The Early Spanish Main. Berkeley and Los Angeles,
        pp. 37, 185-6.
      3 Sturtevant, W. C. (1961). Taino agriculture in J. Wilbert (ed.) The
        evolution of horticultural systems in native South America, Antropoldgica
        Supplement Public, 2, Caracas: Soc. de Ciencias Naturales La Salle,
        pp. 69-82; Sauer, C. O. (1966), op. cit., pp. 51-2, doubts it, but I still
        think that the scanty evidence points towards shifting rather than
        permanent fields.
      4 For a valuable discussion of the contrast between the vegetative and seed
        complexes of New World agriculture, including hypotheses on the origins.
194   Port II Domestication and exploitation of plants      sturtevant

         spread, and correlates of the vegetative type, see Sauer, C. O. (1959)- Age
         and area of American cultivated plants, Adas del XXXIII Congreso
         Internacional de Americanistas, I, pp. 215-29, San Jose.
       5 Rogers, D. J. (1965). Some botanical and ethnological considerations of
         Manihot esculenta, Econ. Bot., 19 (4), pp. 369-77; Johnson, R. M. and
         Raymond, W. D. (1965). The chemical composition of some tropical
         food plants IV. Manioc, Tropical Science, 7 (3), pp. 109-15; Chadha,
         Y. R. (1961). Sources of starch in Commonwealth territories III: Cassava,
         Tropical Science, 3 (3), pp. 101-13.
       6 Especially Las Casas, B. de. (1909). Apologetica historia de las Indias.
         Historiadores de Indias, 1. Nueva Biblioteca de Autores Espaholes 13,
         pp. 29-31 (chapter 11); Oviedo y Valdes, G.F.de(i85i). (1520-57) Historia
         Generaly Natural de las Indias, 1, Madrid: Real Academia de la Historia,
         pp. 269-71 (book 7, chapter 2); Cobo, B. (1890). (1653) Historia del
         Nuevo Mundo, 1. Sevilla, pp. 351-4 (book 4, chapter 7).
       7 Sturtevant, W. C. (1961). ibid.
       8 Pichardo, E. (1862). Diccionario Provincial Casi-Razonado de Vozes
         Cubanas. 3rd ed., Habana. p. 130; Suarez, C. (1921). Vocabulario
         Cubano ... Habana. p. 121.
       9 e.g., Nordenskiold, E. (1919). An ethno-geographical analysis of the
         material culture of two Indian tribes in the Gran Chaco, Comparative
         Ethnographical Studies, 19, Goteborg, p. 79 and map 11; Roth, W. E.
         (1924). An introductory study of the arts, crafts, and customs of the
         Guiana Indians, Bur. of Amer. Ethnol. Annual Rep., 38, pp. 277-80;
         Bennett, W. C. (1949). Household furniture, in Steward, J. H. (ed.)
         Handbook of South American Indians, 5, p. 26.
      10 The archaeological examples: Fewkes, J. W. (1907). The aborigines of
         Porto Rico and neighboring islands, Bur. of Amer. Ethnol. Annual
         Rep., 25, p. 194; Harrington, M. R. (1921). Cuba before Colombus,
         Indian Notes and Monographs [Miscellaneous 17], New York. p. 98
         and pi. 6; Herrera Fritot, R. (1947). Tres tipos de objetos indoarqueo-
         logicos de Santo Domingo, Revista de Arqueologta y Etnologia, epoca 2,
         ano 2, nums. 4-5, pp. 125-42, Habana, pp. 127, 137. The modern
         survivals: Pichardo, E. (1862). ibid.; Bachiller y Morales, A. [(1883).
         Cuba Primitiva; origen, lenguas, tradiciones e historia de los indios de
         las Antilles May ores y las Lucayas. 2nd ed., Habana. p. 372; La Torre y
         Huerta, C. de. (1890). Conferencia cientifica. Anales de la Real Academia
         de Ciencias Medicas, Fisicas y Naturales de la Habana, Revista Cientifica,
         27, p. 328; Coll y Toste, C. (1907). Prehistoria de Puerto-Rico. San Juan,
         p. 250; Taylor, D. (1938). The Caribs of Dominica, Anthropological
         Papers, 3, Bur. Amer. Ethnol. Bull., 119, p. 137.
      11 Nordenskiold, E. (1919). op. cit. pp. 82-4.
      12 Las Casas, B. de. (1909). ibid.
      13 Malaret, A. (1917). Diccionario de provincialismos de Puerto Rico. San
         Juan. p. 82; Malaret. (1946). Diccionario de Americanismos, 3rd ed.,
         Buenos Aires, p. 454; Tejera, E. (1951). Palabras Indijenas de la Isla de
         Santo Domingo (con adiciones por Emilio Tejera, prologo de Pedro
         Henriquez Urena). Ciudad Trujillo, p. 242.
      14 See, for example, the description and a distribution map in Metraux, A.
         (1928). La Civilisation Materielle des Tribus Tupi-Guarani. Paris, pp.103-4,
         114-15. A recent study of the modern South American distribution of
         this and other methods for squeezing manioc pulp is Dole, G. E. (i960).
         Techniques of preparing manioc flour as a key to culture history in tropical
         America, in Wallace, A. F. C. (ed.) Men and Cultures. Philadelphia,
         pp. 241-8.
      *5 Taylor, D. (1938). op. cit. p. 138; Echagoian. (1864). Relacion de la Isla
         Espanola enviada al rey D. Felipe II, por el licenciado Echagoian, oidor de
              History and ethnography of some West Indian starches            195

   la Audiencia de Santo Domingo, Col. de Documentos Ineditos Relativos al
   Descubrimiento, Conquista y Colonizacion de las Posesiones Espaholas en
   America y Oceania, 1, Madrid, p. 17; Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 375;
   Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. p. 188; Tejera, E. (1951). op. cit. p. 391.
16 Las Casas, Oviedo y Valdes and Cobo (see note 6) all comment on the
   substitution; Las Casas mentions the screw press.
17 Cundall, F., and Pietersz, J. L. (1919). Jamaica under the Spaniards:
   abstracted from the archives of Seville. Kingston, pp. 2, 4, 5, 10, 15, 19, 35,
   etc.
18 Piso, W. (1648). De medicina brasiliensi, in Ioannes de Laet (ed.)
   Historia Naturalis Brasiliae . . . Leiden, p. 53.
19 Taylor, D. (1938). op. cit. pp. 128-9. The term has spread from the Lesser
   Antilles to Haiti, for Mintz, S. W., tells me (in lit., June, 1968) that
   “bicet” is the Haitian Creole term for “tray”, including a winnowing tray.
20 Tertre, J. B. du (1654). Histoire Generate, des Isles des Christophe, de la
   Guadeloupe, de la Martinique, et Autres dans PAmerique. . . . Paris, pp.
   178-184; Tertre. (1667). Histoire Generate des Antilles Habites par les
   Franpois . . ., II, Paris, pp. 112-18 and plate facing p. 419.
21 Desportes, J. B. R. P. (1770). Traite ou Abrege des Plantes Usuelles de S.
   Domingue. Vol. 3 of his Histoire des maladies de S. Domingue. Paris, p. 223.
22 Long, E. (1774). The History of Jamaica . . . , III, London, pp. 772-8;
   Browne, P. (1789). The Civil and Natural History of Jamaica, London,
   pp. 349-50; Wright, W. (1787). An account of the medicinal plants
   growing in Jamaica, London Medical Journal, 8 (3), pp. 262-3; Barham, H.
   (1794). Hortus Americanus: containing an account of the . . . vegetable
   productions of South-America and the West-India Islands, and particularly
   of the island of Jamaica . . . Kingston, pp. 34-5; Hughes, G. (1750). The
   Natural History of Barbados. London, p. 150.
23 Cunliffe, R. S. (1916). Yuca; su cultivo, variedades, contenido en almidon
   y fabrication, Rep. de Cuba, Secretaria de Agricultura, Comercio y Trabajo,
   Estacion Experimental Agronomica, Santiago de las Vegas, Boletin No. 34,
   Habana, pp. 19-20; Cook, O. F. and Collins, G. N. (1903). Economic
   plants of Porto Rico, Contributions from the U.S. National Herbarium,
   8 (2), p. 184; Nicholls, H. A. (1929). A Text-Book of Tropical Agriculture.
   2nd ed., rev. by Holland, J. H., London, pp. 430-3; Beckwith, M. W.
   (1927). Notes on Jamaican ethnobotany. Publics, of the Folk-lore Founda¬
   tion, 8, Poughkeepsie: Vassar College, pp. 42-3; Pairault, A. (1900).
   Plantes comestibles feculentes cultivees aux Antilles, Bull, de TAssoc, des
   Chimistes de Sucrerie et de Distillerie de France et des Colonies, 17 (1-2),
   p. 80.
24 Wurzburg, O. B. (1952). Root starches other than those of white and
   sweet potato, Econ. Bot., 6 (3), pp. 211-15.
25 Cunliffe, R. S. (1916). op. cit. pp. 20-8; Nicholls (1929). op. cit. p. 433;
   Burkill, I. H. (1904). The tapioca plant: its history, cultivation and uses;
   a review of existing information, Agricultural Ledger, 11 (10), pp. 135-8;
   Everington, E. (1912). Cassava starch and its uses, West Indian Bulletin,
    The Journal of the Imperial Dept, of Agric. for the West Indies, 12 (4),
   pp. 527-9; Schery, R. W. (1947). Manioc—a tropical staff of life. Econ.
   Bot., 1 (1), pp. 20-5.
26 Beckwith, M. W. (1927). op. cit. p. 42.
27 Jones, W. O. (1959). Manioc in Africa. Stanford, pp. 32, 102.
28 Brautlecht, C. A. (1953). Starch: its sources, production and uses. New
   York. p. 2.
29 Piso, W. (1648). op. cit. pp. 53-4.
30 Bailey, L. H. (ed.) (1912). Cyclopedia of American agriculture. II Crops.
   New York. p. 199; Wurzburg, O. B. (1952). op. cit. p. 152.
31 Schumann, K. (1902). Marantaceae. 11. Heft (IV. 48), in A. Engler (ed.)
196   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants        sturtevant

         DasPflanzenreich...Leipzig, pp. 125-6; de Candolle, A. (1883). Originedes
         Plantes Cultivdes. Paris, pp. 64-5; Bernegg, A. S. von (1929)- Tropische und
         Subtropische Weltwirtschaftspflanzen; ihre Geschichte, Kultur und volks-
         wirtschaftliche Bedeutung. I. Teil: Starke- und Zuckerpflanzen, Stuttgart,
         p. 273; Bois, D. (1927). Les Plantes Alimentaires chez tousles Peuples et
         a travers les Ages; histoire utilisation, culture. 1. Paris, p. 459.
      32 Lowrie, R. H. (1948). The tropical forests: an introduction, in Steward,
         J. H. (ed.) Handbook of [South American Indians, 3, p. 1; Nimuendaju,
         C. (1948). The Cawahib, Parintintin, and their neighbors, in Steward,
         J. H. (ed.) op. cit. p. 295.
      33 Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1851). op. cit. pp. 279-80 (book 7, chapter 6);
         Las Casas, B. de (1909). op. cit. p. 29 (chapter 10); Cobo, B. (1890).
         op. cit. p. 357 (book 4, chapter 9); Santa Cruz, Alonso de (1918). Islario
         General de Todas las Islas del Mundo. Madrid, p. 458.
      34 Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). Botany of Porto Rico and the
         Virgin Islands, Scientific Survey of Porto Rico and the Virgin Islands,
         5, New York. p. 178; Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. pp. 161-2; Maza,
         M. G. de la (1889). Diccionario Botanico de los Nombres Vulgares Cubanosy
         puerto-riquehos. Habana. p. no; Malaret, A. (1931). Diccionario de
         Americanismos. 2nd ed., San Juan. pp. 317, 325, 514; Abad, J. R. (1888).
         La Republica Dominicana; reseha general geografico-estadistica. Santo-
         Domingo. pp. 69, 333.
      35 Colmeiro, M. (1892). Primeras noticias acerca de la vegetacion americana
         . . . , Ateneo de Madrid, Conferencias, Madrid, p. 29; Barrett, O. W. (1928).
         The Tropical Crops . . . New York. p. 381; Loven, S. (1935). Origins of the
         Tainan Culture, West Indies. Goteborg. p. 369; Friederici, G. (1947).
         Amerikanistisches Worterbuch, Univ. Hamburg, Abhandlungen aus dem
         Gebiet der Auslandskunde, 53. Reihe B., Volkerkunde, Kultur geschichte und
         Sprachen, 29, pp. 346-7; Roumain, J. (1942). Contribution a l’etude de
         l’ethnobotanique precolombienne des Grandes Antilles, Bull, du Bureau
         d’ethnologie de la Rep. d’Haiti, 1, p. 40; Rouse, I. (1948). The Arawak, in
         Steward, J. H. (ed.). Handbook of South American Indians, 4, p. 523;
         Sapper, K. (1934). Geographic der altindianischen Landwirtschaft.
         Petermanns Mitteilungen, 80, pp. 41-4, 80-2, 118-21; Sauer, C. O. (1950).
         Cultivated plants of South and Central America, in Steward, J. H. (ed.),
         Handbook of South American Indians, 6, p. 511; Sauer, C. O. [(1966).
         op. cit. p. 54.
      36 Anghiera, P. M. d’ [Peter Martyr] (1574). De Rebus Oceanicis et Novo Orbe,
         decades tres . . . Cologne, p. 301 (decade 3, book 9); Oviedo y Valdes,
         G. F. de (1851). op. cit. pp. 284-5 (book 7, chapter 15).
      37 Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). op. cit. p. 177; Schumann, K.
          (1902). op. cit. p. 126.
      38 The suggested identification as arrowroot is in Colmeiro, M. (1892). op.
         cit. p. 37, and in Barrett, O. W. (1928). op. cit. p. 380—both for “cauallos”;
          on p. 30 of the same work, Barrett suggests Canna for “cabaioes”; Xantho-
          soma is suggested by Gordon, B. Le Roy (1957). Human geography and
         ecology in the Sinu country of Colombia, Ibero-Americana, 39, pp. 101-2.
      39 “Yuquilla” in Cuba: Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. pp. 231-2; Maza y
          Jimenez, M. G. de la, and Roig y Mesa, J. T. (1914). Flora de Cuba
          (datos para su estudio), Rep. de Cuba, Sec. de Agric., Comercio y Trabajo,
          Estacion Experimental Agronomica, Santiago de las Vegas, Boletin No. 22,
          Habana, p. 27; Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 466; “yuquilla” in Puerto
          Rico: Cook, O. F. and Collins, G. N. (1903). op. cit. p. 266;Malaret, A.
          (1917). op. cit. p. 150; Otero, J. I., and Toro, R. A. (1931). Catalogo de
          los nombres vulgares y cientificos de algunas plantas puertorriquenas.
          Gob. de P.R., Depto. de Agric. y Trab., Estacion Experimental Insular,
          Rio Piedras P.R., Boletin No. 37, San Juan, p. 29; “sagu” in Cuba:
             History and ethnography of some West Indian starches          197

   Pichardo, E. (1862). ibid.; Maza, M. G. de la and Roig, J. T. (1914). ibid.;
   Suarez, C. (1921). ibid.; La Sagra, R. de (1831). Historia Econdmico-
   Politicay Estadistica de la Isla de Cuba . . . Habana. p. 82; Roig y Mesa,
   J. T. (1928). Diccionario botanica de nombres vulgares cubanos. Rep. de
   Cuba, Sec. de Agric., Comercio y Trabajo, Estacion Experimental Agro¬
   nomica, Santiago de las Vegas, Boletin Num. 54, Habana, pp. 628, 725:
   “sagu” in the Dominican Republic: Abad, J. R. (1888). op. cit. pp. 69,
   334; “raiz americana” in Cuba: Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 442;
   “maranta” in Puerto Rico: Grosourdy, R. de (1864). El medico Botanico
   Criollo. 4. Paris, p. 371; Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). op. cit.
   p. 177; Otero, J. and Toro, R. A. (1931). ibid.; “maranta” in Haiti:
   Barker, H. D. and Dardeau, W. S. (1930). Flore d'Haiti; cle et description
   des or dr es-families et genres des Spermatophytes d'Haiti . . . Porte-au-
   Prince. p. 60—but these are instances of a “common” name invented
   rather than collected by botanists, for the Linnaean genus was named in
   honour of Bartolommeo Maranta, a sixteenth-century Venetian botanist
   and physician (Miller, P. and Martyn, T. (1807). The Gardener's and
   Botanist's Dictionary . . . new ed. London s.v. Maranta; Bailey, L. H.
   (1949). Manual of Cultivated Plants . . . rev. ed. New York. p. 292;
   “West-Indian salep”: Bernegg, A. S. von (1929). ibid.; “salop” in the
   Virgin Islands: Benzon, P. E. (1823). Om den vestindiske Salop, dens
   Dyrkning, Tilberedelse og almindelige Egenskaber, Tidsskrift for
   Naturvidenskaberne, 2, pp. 158-72; Schomburgk, R. H. (1833). Berichte
   iiber die Kulturpflanzen Westindiens, Linnaea, 8, p. 264; “sulup” in
   Puerto Rico: Grosourdy, R. de (1864). op. cit. 3, p. 141—these are
   variants of a term, evidently ultimately derived from Arabic, which is
   applied in India and the Near East to dried orchid tubers and starch made
   from them (Watt, G. (1908)). The Commercial Products of India, London,
   pp. 962-3; Yule, H. and Burnell, A. C. (1903). Hobson-Jobson: a glossary
   of colloquial Anglo-Indian words and phrases... new ed. London, [reprinted
   1968, London], p. 784; Brautlecht, C. A. (1953). op. cit. p. 285); “touala”
   in Jamaica: Cook, O. F. and Collins, G. N. (1903). op. cit. p. 185; “tulola”
   is cited for Cuba by both Maza, M. G. de la (1889). op. cit. p. 102, and
   Roig, J. T. (1928). op. cit. p. 669, although the same two authors writing
   jointly (1914, op. cit. p. 17) give this word with the note, “we doubt the
   name”.
40 Dutch “arraroot” is given by Boldingh, I. (1914). The Flora of the Dutch
    West Indian islands, II, Curasao, Aruba and Bonaire, Leiden, p. 19; many of
   the South-east Asian and Malaysian terms are listed in Heyne, K. (1927).
   De Nuttige Planten van Nederlandsch Indie. 2nd ed. Batavia, pp. 507-8,
   and in Brown, W. H. (no date) [between 1935 and 1941]. Useful plants of
   the Philippines. Commonwealth of the Philippines, Dept, of Agric. and
   Commerce, Manila, Technical Bull., 10 (1), p. 483; to these may be added
   Burmese adalu’.
41 Martius, C. F. P. von (1867). Zur Ethnographic Amerika’s zumal
   Brasiliens, Vol. 1 of his Beitrage zur Ethnographic und Sprachenkunde
   Amerika’s zumal Brasiliens. Leipzig, p. 689 note; for “haru” and “aru”,
   see Roth, W. E. (1924). op. cit. p. 216.
42 Bartlett, H. H. (1953). English names of some East-Indian plants and
   plant products, Asa Gray Bull., 2 (2), pp. 159-62.
43 Tertre, J. P. du (1654). op. cit. pp. 151-2.
44 Sloane, H. (1696). Catalogus Plantarum quae in Insula Jamaica sponte
   proveniunt . . . adjectis aliis quibusdam quae in insulis Maderae, Barbados,
   Nieves, & Sancti Christophori nascuntur .... London, p. 122; G6mara,
   F. L. de (1749). Historia de las lndias. Historiadores primitivos de las
   Indias Occidentales (Andres Gonzalez de Barcia. ed.), 2, Madrid, pp.
   63-5 (chapter 71); Sloane (1707). A Voyage to the Islands Madera, Barbados
198    Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants       sturtevant


          Nieves, S. Christophers and Jamaica . . . 1, London, pp. 253-4; among
          modern botanists recognizing this description are Schumann, K. (1902).
          op. cit. p. 135, and de Candolle, A. (1883). op. cit. p. 65.
      45 Barham, H. (1794). op. cit. pp. 6-8.
      46 Hughes, G. (1750). op. cit. p. 221; Long, E. (1774). op. cit. pp. 759,
          855; Wright, W. (1787). op. cit. pp. 269-70; Browne, P. (1789). op. cit.
         pp.1x2-13.
      47 Miller, P. and Martyn, T. (1807). op. cit., s.v. Maranta; Anonymous
          (1893). Arrowroot, Bull, of Misc. Info., Royal Gardens, Kew, 82, 83,
         pp. 331-3; Hamilton, W. (1846). On the Maranta arundinacea, and its
          applications as an antidote to animal and vegetable poisons, Pharmaceutical
         Journal and Transactions, 6 (1), pp. 25-8; Guibourt, [G.] (1846). Nouvelles
         considerations sur l’amidon, l’arrow-root et le sagou . . ., Journal de
         Pharmacie et de Chimie, troisieme serie, 9, pp. 191-8; Milburn, W.
         (1813). Oriental Commerce ... 2. London, p. 207.
      48 St. Croix: Benzon, P. E. (1923). ibid.; later Virgin Islands: Schomburgk,
          R. H. (1833). op. cit. pp. 264-5; Cuba: La Sagra, R. de (1831). ibid.;
         Antigua in 1837: Harris, D. R. (1965). Plants, animals, and man in the
          Outer Leeward Islands, West Indies . . , JJniv. of Calif. Publ. in Geog¬
         raphy, 18, p. 113.
      49 Cogswell, C. (1845). On the arrow-root of Bermuda. London and Edinburgh
         Monthly Journal of Medical Science, 5 (10), pp. 789-96; Ure, A. (1845).
         Recent Improvements in Arts, Manufactures, and Mines: being the second
         edition of a supplement to the third edition of his Dictionary. London, pp.
          8-10; Saunders, W. (1882). Report of the Superintendent of Gardens and
          Grounds, Report of the [(/.S'.] Commissioner of Agriculture for the Years
         1881 and 1882, p. 226; Anonymous (1893). St. Vincent arrowroot. Bull,
         of Misc. Info., Royal Gardens, Kew, 80, pp. 191-204.
      50 Bernegg, A. S. von (1929). op. cit. p. 275; Bois, D. (1927). ibid.; Burkill,
         1. H. (1935). A Dictionary of the Economic Products of the Malay Peninsula.
         London, p. 1424; Raymond, W. D. and Squires, J. (1959). Sources of
         starch in colonial territories II: Arrowroot (Maranta arundinacea Linn.),
          Tropical Science, 1 (3), pp. 182-92; Safford, W. E. (1905). The useful
         plants of Guam . . . Contributions from the U.S. Natl. Herbarium, 9,
         pp. 318-19.
      51 Indonesia: Heyne, K. (1927). ibid.; Malaya: Burkill, I. H. (1935). ibid.;
         Philippines: Brown, W. H. n.d., op. cit. p. 438; Burma: author’s field
         notes, 1955.
      52 Raymond, W. D. and Squires, J. (1959). ibid.
      53 Nicholls, H. A. (1929). op. cit. p. 434; Beckwith, M. A. (1927). op. cit.
         p. 11; Howard, R. A. (1952). The vegetation of the Grenadines, Wind¬
         ward Islands, British West Indies, Contributions from the Gray Herbarium
         of Harvard Univ., 174, p. 98.
      54 Schuster, J. (1932). Cycadaceae. Heft 99 (IV. I), in Engler, A. (ed.) Das
         Pfanzenreich .... Leipzig, pp. 150-60; Whiting, M. G. (1963). Toxicity
         of cyads, Econ. Bot., 17 (4), pp. 270-302.
      55 The sixteenth-century accounts are: Las Casas, B. de (1909). op. cit.
         pp. 11, 29 (chapters 3, 10); Las Casas, B. de (1951). Historia de las Indias.
         Mexico and Buenos Aires. 1, pp. 419, 462 (book 1, chapters 106, 121),
         2, p. 265 (book 2, chapter 17); Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de (1851). op. cit.
         p. 284 (book 7, chapter 16); Anghiera, P. M. d’ [Peter Martyr] (1574).
         ibid.; and Ansanus, T. et al. (1867), Carta que escribieron varios Padres de
         la orden de Santo Domingo, residentes en la isla Espanola..., Coleccion de
         Documentos Ineditos ... [del Archivo] de Indias. pp. 419, 430; the modern
         popular terminology is in: Boyrie Moya, E. De, Krestenson, M. K. and
         Goggin, J. M. (1957). Zamid starch in Santo Domingo . . , Florida
         Anthropologist, 10 (3-4), pp. 17-40; Barker, H. D. and Dardeau, W. S
                 History and ethnography of some West Indian starches          199

       (1930). op. cit. p. 3; Abad, J. R. (1888). op. cit. p. 73; Garda, J. G.
       (1876). Memorias para la historia de Quisqueya 6 sea de la antigua parte
       espahola de Santo Domingo .... Santo Domingo, p. 250; Roig, J. T.
       (1928). op. dt. p. 348; Britton, N. L. and Wilson, P. (1923). op. tit. pp.
        164-5; Grosourdy, R. de (1864). op. tit. 3. p. 137; and Maza, M. G.
       de la (1889). op. tit. p. 78.
    56 Miyares Gonzalez, F. (1954). Noticias particulares de la Isla y Plaza de
        San Juan Bautista de Puerto Rico. Rio Piedras. pp. 79-80; Abbad y
       Lasierra, I. (1866). Historia Geografica, Civil y Natural de la Isla de San
       Juan Bautista de Puerto-Rico. new ed. San Juan. pp. 252, 438.
    57 Grosourdy, R. de (1864). op. tit. 3, pp. 144-5.
    58 Mintz, S. W., in lit. 9/9/1957, reporting his field inquiries.
    59 Prenleloup, L.-A. (1872). Remarques sur quelques Zamia et leurs produits,
       Bull, de la Soc. Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles, 11 (67), pp. 277-82,
        Lausanne; Boyrie Moya, E. de et al. (1957). ibid.
    60 Pereira, J. (1854). The Elements of Materia Medica and Therapeutics, 2. 3rd
       Amer. ed. Philadelphia, pp. 283-4; Smith, J. (1882). A Dictionary of
       Popular Names of the Plants which furnish the Natural and Acquired Wants
       of Man . . . London, p. 362.
    61 Lewis, C. B. (Inst, of Jamaica, Kingston), in lit. 3/7/1954 to J. M. Goggin.
    62 Davenport, W. H., in lit. 20/8/1955, reporting his field inquiries.
    63 Pichardo, E. (1862). op. cit. p. 272; Maza, M. G. de la, and Roig, J. T.
       (1914). op. cit. p. 25; Suarez, C. (1921). op. cit. p. 529; Roig y Mesa,
       T. J. (1945). Plantas Medicinales, Aromaticas 0 Venenosas de Cuba. Habana.
       P-5H-
    64 Lindley, J. (1838). Flora Medica; a botanical account of all the more im¬
       portant plants used in medicine . . . London, p. 550; Jackson, J. R. (1864).
       Cyads. Intellectual Observer, 5 (4). p. 252; Gifford, J. (1912). The Ever¬
       glades and Other Essays relating to Southern Florida. 2nd ed. Miami, p. 171.




8—DOPAA
      M. VILLARET-von ROCHOW

      Fruit size variability of Swiss prehistoric
      Malus sylvestris

The study of prehistoric apples in Switzerland is at the moment confined to
size comparisons of carbonized fruit-halves from different neolithic and
bronze age sites with a few present-day specimens. Unfortunately wild crab
apple trees, belonging to Malus sylvestris ssp. sylvestris, have become rare in
western Switzerland; they are scattered about the Jura and the Prealps, are
even less frequent on the Swiss Central Plain (Schweizerisches Mittelland)
and occur sometimes in hedges in the Rhone Valley. In 1967, we gathered
from one tree in a Carpinion forest reservation “Bois de Chenes” near Nyon,
twenty specimens of fruit. They show a wider range of variability than the
statistics published by K. and F. Bertsch1 which were based on sixty wild
apples from Beuron/Wiirttemberg (see Fig. 1). Our specimens were cut and
carbonized in the laboratory at 220-240°C. We noticed considerable shrinkage
(about 25% in breadth and 28% in length) and, in connection with this, the
characteristic somewhat flattened shape of most of our crab apples became
even more pronounced. The maximum size of our material found in 1967
corresponds, after carbonization, astonishingly well with the limit values
given by Oswald Heer2; they lie within 27 mm. breadth and 24 mm. length.
Basing results only on dry herbarium materials, I formerly fixed the maximum
size of recent crab apples as 31 X 28 mm.3; but as it would be better to
compare prehistoric collections with carbonized present-day specimens, the
values given by Heer would seem to be much more suitable.
   Shape and size of apple pips vary greatly in M. sylvestris (sensu stricto) and
hitherto have not yielded any reliable relationship to fruit size. Since the
increase in volume of fruit is in most cases due to an increase in the breadth
of the fruit (only a small percentage of the fruit are oblong or show a tendency
to increase in length), the breadth of the fruit has been chosen as an approxi¬
mate criterion for fruit-size (Fig. 1). The percentage of oblong forms is
mentioned in the descriptions which follow.
mm   0   5   10 15   0   5   0   5   0   5   10 15 20   0   5   10 15 2 0 25   0   5 10 15 20 25   0   5   10 15   .0   5   0   5   10 15




                     White: fresh fruits.
                     Black: carbonized material.
                     All curves refer to maximum diameters.
                     Underlined numbers: arithmetic means.
                                              Swiss fruit size variability   203

  The prehistoric samples in Fig. 1 refer to the following sites:

     (A) Neolithic


1 Vallon des Vaux (Chavannes le Chene, Vaud): rock-shelter in calcareous
Molasse sandstone from which about 400 apples were collected during the
excavation by Dr. M. Sitter ding in 1966. The site is considered to be among
the oldest neolithic localities in western Switzerland (Chasseen pottery).
Age: c. 3200 b.c. The fruit material shows an exceptionally high number of
oblong specimens (28-5%) as well as very small crab apples. With reference
to the latter, we cannot follow K. and F. Bertsch’s4 suggestion that one small
specimen found in a Bandkeramik site at Bockingen represented “Malus
paradisiaca” or “Malus praecox Borkh5”.


2 Robenhausen: older museum collections of Heer’s and Messikommers’
classic “lake-dwelling” at Kanton Zurich which are now in the Musee
d’Archeologie Lausanne (109 specimens), the Landesmuseum Zurich
(eighteen specimens), and the Historisches Museum Bern (thirty-one
specimens). Seventeen specimens which were measured by Neuweiler6 have
been added to the graph in Fig. 1. Approximate age: between 3000 and
2000 b.c., Cortaillod to Schnurkeramik.

3 Egolzwil 4: excavation by the Landesmuseum Zurich in i960 (134 speci¬
mens examined). Frequency of oblong specimen 15%, some pear-shaped.
Approximate age: between 3000 and 2500 b.c.

4 Ziirich-Utoquai-Fdrberstrasse: excavated by Kantonale Denkmalspflege
Zurich in 1962. All the fruit specimens were found in the lowest Horgen
level and they are especially well preserved, with large fleshy parts. Only
one specimen is longer than it is broad (see Fig. 2). Approximate age:
between 2500-2200 b.c.

     (B) Bronze age


5 Morigen/Kanton Bern: collection of the Historisches Museum Bern
(nine specimens). Even the small specimens contained normally developed
seeds. Approximate age: between 1200-800 b.c.

6 Sumpf-Zug: excavated by Dr. J. Speck7 and collections now in the Kan-
tonales Museum fur Urgeschichte Zug (eighty-four specimens examined).
The fruit are typically-shaped crab apples, only three of which are longer
than they are broad. Even the smallest ones have been cut carefully in halves.
Age: about 1200-800 b.c. This settlement was occupied for at least 200 years
and was gradually enlarged8.
204   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   villaret-VON ROCHOW




                                                                                 to




                                                                                 04


                                                                                 o



                                                                                 $

                                                                                 to
                                                                                 <N


                                                                                 CN



                                                                                 C\i
                                                                                 CN)




         Zurich-Utoquai-Farberstrasse
                                                                                 o
                                                                                 <N


                                                                             -     s
                                                                                   E
                                                                                  -c
                                        (n-67)                               - to "O
                                                                                   0
                                                                                   0)

                                                                                       /|\




                                                         mm length (r


                                                                 <2 a <u v
                                                                             1 £
                                              Swiss fruit size variability   205


7 Corcelettes near Grandson/Vaud: museum collection of Musee d’Archeo-
logie, Lausanne (nine specimens, all of them cut).

As far as can be seen from the material examined, only a low percentage of
the total number of fruit found in any of the settlements he beyond the range
of present-day crab apples. None of the curves in Fig. 1 indicate a significant
frequency maximum outside the crab apple class. Moreover, very large
specimens appear to be restricted to only a few neolithic localities, and only
one or two specimens reach a maximum of 36 mm. breadth (Robenhausen:
one specimen at Landesmuseum Zurich; Wangen: one specimen according to
Bertsch9; and one further specimen (III, 1) from Bodman seems to be of
considerable size10). Among the oblong fruits, the “longer lake dwelling apple”
described by Heer and figured in one specimen from Robenhausen has only
been observed in one specimen from Burgaschisee-Sud11.
   Swiss settlements of the late bronze age until now have only yielded a
small Malus sylvestris-type (total numbers examined: 102). Instead of an
increase in size which could have been caused by selection and cultivation,
we observe, on the contrary, a decrease in size (see Fig. 1: arithmetic means
of breadth: 19-1; 20-5; 18-4 mm.). Whatever the interpretation of large size
neolithic apples should be, there is as yet no evidence at all of a progressive
evolution up to the late bronze age.
   Heer and Neuweiler both suggested that there was cultivation of apples in
the Swiss neolithic period, but their arguments were based on quite different
views. Heer12 laid particular stress on the high numbers, and great importance
of, wild, acid crab apples for the Swiss lake-dwelling people before suggest¬
ing that a “considerable number” of larger apples, found only at Robenhausen
by the author, probably represented a “cultivated variety”. Basing his
conclusion on his general experience and some few measurements, Neuweiler13
noticed a gradual transition between the small and the large-size fruit so that
he could not accept them as a separate variety. But further on in the same
article Neuweiler—surprisingly enough—returned to de Candolle’s old
idea14 that the large quantity of stocked prehistoric apples suggested apple
cultivation.
   Meanwhile the general picture of Swiss neolithic husbandry has repeatedly
shown its mixed character: besides cereals, flax, opium poppy and other
crops, considerable numbers of wild fruit have been collected (such as hazel
nuts (Corylus avellana), raspberries (Rubus idaeus), acorns (Quercus spp.)
and sloes (Prunus spinosa)), for instance at Auvernier near the end of the
neolithic period, where they are associated with large numbers of apple pips.
Thus, several kinds of wild fruit still played an important role during the
Swiss neolithic period and therefore the presence of large quantities of
apples cannot be taken as evidence that they also were not wild.
206   Part II Domestication and exploitation of plants   vjllaret-von rochow



      Notes
       1 Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). Geschichte unserer Kulturpflanzen. Stuttgart,
         pp. 1-275.
       2 Heer, O. (1865). Die Pflanzen der Pfahlbauten, Neujahrsbl. Naturf. Ges.
         Zurich a.d.J. 1866, 68, pp. 1-54.
       3 Villaret-von Rochow, M. (1967). Frucht- und Samenreste aus der
         neolithischen Station Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud, Acta Bernensia, 2 (4),
         Fig. 13.
       4 Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). ibid.
       5 Bertsch, K. (1961). Einheimische Wildapfel, Jb. vaterl. Naturkde Wurttem-
         berg, 116, pp. 185-94.
       6 Neuweiler, E. (1924). Pflanzenreste aus den Pfahlbauten des ehemaligen
         Wauwilersees, Mitt. Naturf. Ges. Luzern, 9, pp. 301-23.
       7 Speck, J. (1955). Die Ausgrabungen in der spatbronzezeitlichen Ufersied-
         lung Zug-“Sumpf”, in Das Pfahlbauproblem. Monographien zur Ur- und
         Fruhgeschichte der Schweiz, 11, Basel, pp. 275-334.
       8 Huber, B. and Merz, W. (1962). Jahrringchronologische Untersuchungen
         zur Baugeschichte der urnenfelderzeitlichen Siedlung Zug-Sumpf,
         Germania, 40, pp. 44-56.
       9 Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). op. cit. p. 97.
      10 See Bertsch, K. and F. (1949). op. cit. Fig. 49, which is classed among
         “cultivated neolithic apples”.
      11 Villaret-von Rochow, M. (1967). op. cit. pi. IV, Figs. 10 and n.
      12 Heer, O. (1865). ibid.
      13 Neuweiler, E. (1924). ibid.
      14 de Candolle, A. (1883). Uorigine des Plantes Cultivees. Paris, pp. 1-377.
      Section 2: Domestication and exploitation of animals




      R. J. BERRY

      The genetical implications of domestication in animals


When early man discovered that there were certain advantages in conserving
certain animals near to his dwelling place, he was entering into the first phase
of domesticating them1. At this juncture, the only sign of domestication
available to the archaeologist would be ecological2. However there is fre-
quendy too small an amount of material available for determining if animal
remains found in association with man represent a random sample of a wild¬
living population or one drawn from a “domesticated” population. In practice
it is necessary to ask the question: what criteria can be used to characterize a
