domesticated form ?
    This question pre-supposes that domestication involves change; some
of this change will be inherited and some will be environmentally determined.
Whatever the cause, there are two questions that must be faced in any attempt to
specify characters by which domesticated forms can be recognized. These are:

1 Are there any known morphological changes which inevitably accompany
  domestication ?
2 Can the same changes arise by any other mechanism besides domestication ?

  This paper is an attempt to suggest answers to these questions. I have
used animal examples, but the same arguments can almost certainly be applied
to plants3.



      Changes which follow domestication (see Fig. 1)

A number of traits have been claimed to be characteristic of domesticated
forms. Zeuner4 has summarized the more important of these:
2o8   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    berry


1 Size: early types of domesticated animal tend to be smaller than their wild
  relations and “small size is used as a diagnostic character in prehistoric
  deposits where wild and domesticated forms are liable to occur together”.
2 Colour: wild colouration is exceptional in most domesticated animals.
  In particular “piebaldness in the animals depicted by early man is definite
  evidence of domestication”.
3 Changes in the skull: “the most important effects of domestication are
  exhibited by the skull, mainly because they are easily recognizable in
  fossil material from ancient dwelling sites. . . . The rule is that the facial
  part of the skull tends to be shortened relative to the cranial, which is but
  little affected.” This may cause correlated changes in the dentition, and “at
  a very early stage of domestication the teeth became smaller than they are
  in wild forms. . . . With progressive shortening of the face, teeth which are
  already in the state of reduction may disappear entirely, such as the first
  pre-molars and third molars”. Horn size tends to decrease.
4 Post-cranial skeleton: no changes which reliably indicate domestication
  are accepted, but “in domesticated cattle, weak muscle-ridges and poorly
  defined facets of the joints make it comparatively easy to recognize speci¬
  mens of domesticated origin, and also in the domesticated pig, where the
  epiphyses of the limb bones do not fuse with the diaphyses until long after
  maturity is reached”. The number of caudal vertebrae is almost invariably
  reduced in domesticated forms, except in sheep where an “increase in the
  number of tail vertebrae beyond twelve is a virtually certain character of
  domestication”.
5 Hair: the greatest changes are associated with the underlying shorter hairs,
  especially in species which have a large amount of wool in the wild
  forms.
6 Soft parts: the development of local fat accumulations (as in the hump of
  camels) has usually been favoured under conditions of domestication;
  the size of the brain relative to the rest of the body may be reduced, some
  parts being affected more than others; musculature may be increased (as in
  draught or racing horses) or reduced (as with the chewing muscles of
  carnivores).

7 In general

  (a) New characters are rarely produced, but existing ones selected.
  (b) Pathological conditions are often favoured.
  (c) Under domestication, growth rates are frequently affected, producing
      allometric and often neotenous changes.

  Zeuner discusses each of these points, mentioning exceptions. The crucial
question is to what extent some or all of these changes, which are undoubtedly
associated with domestication in certain forms, may be regarded as generally
diagnostic of the state.
                     The genetical implications of domestication in animals   209



      Observed changes upon domestication: the Norway rat

The most intensive studies of domestication have been carried out on the
grey or Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus)5. This work helps to put into per¬
spective the suggestions summarized above, and is important because it
involved domestication alone without associated selection for economic or
aesthetic characters.
  The Norway rat seems to have been introduced to Britain about 1730 and
to North America about 1775. It was probably taken into captivity about
18006. At that time rat-baiting was popular in England and France. Recently
trapped rats were placed in a pit and a terrier let loose amongst them. The
spectators bet on the time required by different terriers to kill the last rat.
Large numbers of rats had to be caught and held in readiness for such
spectacles. Richter7 has written of records which indicate that albinos were
removed from such collections and retained for breeding and exhibition.
  This was the beginning of the domestication of most modem strains of
laboratory rats, and no more is known of the process than for any other
animal. However, in 1919 H. D. King8 began a “repeat” of the domestication
of the species. He took into his laboratory 16 male and 20 female wild-caught
rats, and the study of their descendants is still continuing, more than fifty
generations later.
  The first results of laboratory breeding of King’s “captive-greys” were
associated with reproductive performances. The early generations were
marked by a high degree of female sterility (only 6 of the original 20
females bred) and infant mortality, and it was necessary to foster the first
generation young on to “well-domesticated” mothers. It was suggested that
the infertility of the wild females and the relatively high proportion of sterile
animals was due to disturbance of the nervous system brought about by fear
and confinement in cages. However the incidence of female sterility declined
from 37 to 6% in the first eight generations, and all the females chosen for
breeding from the thirteenth generation onward were fertile.
  As the proportion of fertile females increased, so did the length of the
reproductive period: the time between the birth of the first and last fitter in
the twenty-fifth generation was more than double that in the first (440 days
as compared with 204 days). This was achieved by females becoming pregnant
at an increasingly early age, and also breeding later in fife. Since fitter size
remained approximately constant (c. 60 young per litter)9, this had the
effect that fecundity increased from an average of 23-1 young per female in the
first generation to an average of 63-3 young in the twenty-fifth generation.
  Mean adult weight increased fairly steadily to a gain of about 20% over the
first twenty-five generations, so that the rats became slightly heavier on
average than those of the long-established Wistar albino strain. Individual
rats attaining an adult weight considerably above the generation average
2io   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    berry


appeared in increasing numbers as the generations progressed. These
exceptionally large individuals were tentatively attributed to the segregation
of genes acting mainly during adult life. However the variability of body
weight at all ages decreased over the generations, presumably due to an
increase in genetical homogeneity. Body weight increased proportionally
more than body length over the first ten generations, and during this time the
pituitary gland increased in weight and the thyroid decreased.
  The docility of the rats increased over the generations, but even at the
forty-third generation they were not so tame as Wistar albinos. Farris and
Yeakel10 showed that King’s strain were highly susceptible to audiogenic
seizures, and were more emotional or fearful than Wistar albinos in a standard
open-field psychological test. The “captive-grey” rats often exhibited nervous
or savage behaviour (jumping, squealing and biting) towards humans. Farris
and Yeakel suggested that the different responses of the two strains might be
due to the genetical constitutions of the founding members of each. Keeler
and King11 have attempted to analyse the consequence of genetical substitutions
in King’s “captive-grey” strain by studying differences between mutants and
non-mutants for eight mutations which appeared in the strain (six affecting
coat colour or hair structure, one producing waltzing behaviour, and one
shortening the tail). Each of the sub-strains derived from different mutants
exhibited a characteristic behaviour, and each produced a range of anatomical
modifications in mean gland weights or skeletal measurements. The con¬
clusions were that the characteristics of the “fully-laboratorized” Wistar
albino strain could have been achieved by substitution of the hooded, black
(non-agouti) and albino allelomorphs into the “captive-grey” genotype, the
most important one being that of the black allelomorph. (For example, 73%
of blacks tickled on the nose with a fine brush exhibited no rage-reaction, as
compared with only 15% of their agouti sibs12.)
  Now these findings cannot distinguish between the pleiotropic effects of a
gene and close linkage of a gene with loci affecting temperament and be¬
haviour. Keeler was inclined to accept the first explanation, largely because
eighteen of the more well-known strains of laboratory rats were homozygous
for black, seemingly too great a number to have acquired the allelomorph by
chance incorporation. However, neither Stone13 nor Bendig and Braun14 could
find any difference in response between coloured and albino segregants in
various behavioural tests, and Broadhurst15 found that black animals of an
F2 generation were more timid than their agouti sibs. It would appear,
therefore, that the agouti locus is more likely to be linked with genes affecting
behaviour than to affect it directly.
  Another approach to the domestication of animals is to compare domestica¬
ted with wild forms. Richter16 has done this for the Norway rat, comparing
rats trapped around Baltimore city with Wistar albinos. He found no obvious
differences between the two forms as regards external appearance, structure of
skeleton or growth rate to about 3°o days. After this, the wild rats grew
                    The genetical implications of domestication in animals    211


faster and attained a heavier final weight. The greatest differences were in the
weights of the internal organs, endocrine glands especially, which were
generally lighter in the laboratory rats. In particular, the adrenals of the
laboratory animals weighed on average only one quarter to one half of their
weight in the wild animals, the biggest difference being in the extent of the
cortex. This anatomical difference had physiological consequences in that
wild rats could not survive for long after adrenalectomy, even when given
additional salt, whereas most laboratory rats did survive. The deaths were
quite sudden and appeared to result from an inability to cope even with
normal laboratory stresses. On the other hand, the glomerular zone of the
adrenal cortex has a mineral salt regulating and conserving function, and
wild rats were able to tolerate a diet with a low salt content which was
deleterious to laboratory rats.
  The adrenal lipids of laboratory rats were easily depleted by fighting or
X-irradiation, but these stresses had no apparent effect on the adrenal lipid
content of wild rats. The greater secretory capability of the latter probably
explains the fact that wild rats are little affected by gonadectomy, whereas
laboratory rats treated thus show an almost complete cessation of spontaneous
activity, although this is restorable by treatment with cortisone. It is interest¬
ing that these hormonal differences are exactly those which might be expected
as a correlated consequence of selecting for earlier and more efficient breeding
in domesticated rats (see below).



      Changes (Cmimicking” domestication

The Norway rat increased its body weight by a fifth in the first twenty-five
generations of domestication. Since different parts of the body have different
growth rates, this means that there is plenty of possibility for change in
proportions producing many of the changes discussed by Zeuner17. A factor
enhancing such allometric changes is that one of the most potent effects of
domestication in any species is selection for earlier sexual maturity by breed¬
ing from the first maturing young18. However, extremely rapid change in
body size may occur under natural conditions completely independently of
domestication. This is most apparent when the stabilizing influence of gene
flow is removed from a species, usually when it colonizes an island19. Foster20
has shown that in general larger animals (carnivores, artiodactyls and lago-
morphs) decrease in size when isolated, while smaller animals (rodents)
increase. This tendency is well illustrated by the races of rabbits (Oryctolagus
cuniculus) and field-mice (.Apodemus sylvaticus) on islands round the British
coast. Island rabbits may be about 20% lighter than their mainland neigh¬
bours21, while island field-mice may be twice the size of their neighbours22.
Moreover, these size differences may arise quickly: the house mouse (Mus
musculus) on the Welsh island of Skokholm have been isolated for only
     212   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals         berry




                                                               < h;
                                                                     in
                                                               u <        <L>
                                                                     cc   >
                                                               o I— 'in
                                                                     CO
                                                               O P <u
                                                               uj m
                                                                     cn
                                                                          o
                                                               tcZ
                                                                          73
                                                                          C
                                                               Z Q        rd
                                                               2>-
                                                               I-         "a3 £
                                                               o
                                                               LU <
                                                               _J <_)
                                                               W  P nJ
                                                               cn LU E
                                                                     X    o
                                                               LO I— D
                                                               X          03 _C
                                                               O
                                                               CJ         CD i-
                                                               (S)
                                                                          c oa
                                                               X          X? 03
                                                               o          03
                                                               o                CD




                                                                                     CD
                                                                                          in
                                                                . Li-           u
                                                                                2    2  zj
                                                               CQ o                  a> o  LJ
                                                                    03 £                CD
                                                                                     & >>
                                                               ^15 M—
                                                                   — jC
                                                                                     -Q N
                                                                                        O
                                                               >i| £'l               - E £
                                                                                     m o
                                                                         <U JC
                                                                          0» CD
                                                               “lL
                                                                    c
                                                                    £ S "2 £
                                                               g° o g rt m c
                                                               °-z
                                                               qQ            r=s .Q
                                                                    X ° CL> U o
                                                               < |5 <     03 XJ .tZ in
                                                                                      a>
                                                               ljS       JD -P ~ 'tz
                                                                                  Q) ’c
                                                                          5 C         03
                                                               s|   tr C ■3
                                                                          u^  Q m< E
                                                                              2
                                                                    z'5^8 ■o
                                                               l£ O u 2       & <D c
                                                                          E in cc rt




                                                               LU
<                                                              _J
                                                               m
cc                                                             < <=> z
                  (BuipBajBas sqdjouuoiaipe p jaquunu ’sm)     Cin
                                                               uj >: 2
                                                               Qh-b
3                     AimaviavA ivoiibnho jo iNnowv            CnO <
                    The genetical implications of domestication in animals   213


seventy years, but they are 20% longer and heavier than their closest main¬
land relatives23. There seems little doubt that increased size is an adaptive
character for small mammals on islands24, and that there is sufficient size
variation present in natural populations to enable the mean size of individuals
to be fairly rapidly adjusted by natural selection25.
  The analogy between the origins and characteristics of island and domesti¬
cated races can be pushed some way26: both experience greatly restricted
gene-flow with the bulk of their relatives; both undergo adaptation to a
specialized environment; and this adaptation is largely dependent upon the
genetical variation available in the founding members of the form in ques¬
tion27. This means that different organisms will differ in their responses to the
same conditions (e.g. change of size of rabbits and mice on islands) making
it impossible to formulate a general rule of the changes expected when a
common selective pressure (such as domestication) is applied. Furthermore,
the response to the same pressure will depend on the available allelomorphs
in the gene-pool, and may differ from locality to locality. For example, DDT
resistance in house-flies has arisen independently in many different parts
of the world—and by at least four different biochemical (or genetical)
mechanisms28; the tail of house mice is a heat regulating organ and becomes
shorter relative to body length northwards through the British Isles—but
in the Faeroes the tail is 20% longer than in Shetland mice, and is approxi¬
mately the same length as in southern English mice29. The consequences
of these considerations is that even within a single species, it may be extremely
difficult to lay down criteria to distinguish between domesticated and non-
domesticated forms. Zeuner regarded wild coat colour as uncommon and
piebaldness as distinctive of domesticated forms, but many laboratory strains
of the Norway rat have wild-type coat colour; Searle30 has described a dine
in blotched tabby in Western European cats; Hebridean field mouse races all
arose from the same stock yet differ considerably in their coat colour and
extent of ventral white colouration31; and wild house mice are polymorphic
for allelomorphs affecting belly colour and spotting32. Tooth loss may have
nothing to do with a trend towards smaller jaws33. Even pathological allelo¬
morphs can be common in non-domesticated forms: this is well known in
man34, but high frequencies of deleterious allelomorphs are often found in
other forms (most American populations of house mice contain many
recessive lethal allelomorphs of the t-series—Dunn; over 70% of Skokholm
house mice have spina bifida occulta—Berry)35.



      Genetical diversity of populations

We are still suffering a hangover in our thought from the old type concept of a
species, and its genetical corollary that individuals are homozygous at
virtually all loci. This “classical” idea of population genetics implied that
214   Part 11 Domestication and exploitation of animals     berry

natural variation is extremely limited, and in the context of archaeology any
specimens which “deviated” (usually on subjective grounds) from the
normal, or which bore a resemblance to modem domesticated forms, could
be regarded as evidence for domestication. It is becoming increasingly clear
that homozygosity is not the normal state of affairs for many loci36, and that
perhaps 10-20% of loci are normally heterozygous37. This means that a
considerable amount of variation will arise in every generation as a con¬
sequence of segregation and recombination38, although most of the extreme
variants will be eliminated before they can contribute to the next generation39.
As a consequence exact and rapid adaptive response to environmental change
is possible and inevitable40. Unless this change involves selection of an
allelomorph with obvious phenotypic effects, this adaptation might not be
easily detectable. On the other hand, correlated phenotypic responses due to
linkage are almost certain (cf. the apparent pleiotropic effects of non-agouti in
the Norway rat).
  Usually domestication involves selection for some desirable quality,
such as egg laying ability, coat texture or meat yield. Most artificial selection
will produce a distinctive phenotype. However there is no reason to believe
that domestication per se will alter the phenotype41 or even a major part of the
genotype42. The Norway rat illustrates this point well.
  Another example is the difficulty of distinguishing between the skulls of
coyotes and domestic dogs, even though these forms are normally regarded
as belonging to two species (Canis latrans and C. familiaris respectively).
Howard43 has described a method for separating the two, but it is based on a
fairly sophisticated character (the ratio between the palatal width and the
length of the upper molar tooth-row), and Howard had available 194 skulls
of known identity. Domestication is primarily the establishment of a stock
breeding under manageable conditions (this is exemplified by the husbandry
of animals in zoos)44, and hence a domesticated form is really a local ecotype
of a species. As such it is adapted to a greater or less extent for human use, and
may have become too specialized for life in the wild45.
  I began this paper by asking two questions. The rather destructive answer
to these questions must be that it is not possible to recognize any traits which
inevitably accompany domestication, and, even worse, most of the criteria by
which domestication has been claimed to be recognizable, may occur as a
result of processes which have nothing to do with domestication. This does
not mean that domestication changes can never be recognized in any particular
well-known form (such as pig or sheep), but it does mean that it is impossible
to extrapolate from (say) cows to horses or even between extreme forms of the
same species (such as Indian and European cattle). The conclusion and moral
to which we are forced is that domestication should never be claimed from
archaeological material unless there is a clear and continuous lineage with
modern forms, or unless cultural remains provide incontrovertible evidence
of domestication46.
                The genetical implications of domestication in animals     215




Notes
 1 See Bokonyi, S., this volume, pp. 219-29.
 2 See Bokonyi, S. ibid, and Chaplin, R. E., this volume, pp. 231-45.
 3 Salisbury, Sir E. (1961). Weeds and Aliens. London; Heiser, C. B. (1965).
   Sunflowers, weeds and cultivated plants, in Baker, H. G. and Stebbins,
   G. L. (eds.) The Genetics of Colonizing Species. New York and London;
   Jones, D. A. (1967). Polymorphism, plants and natural populations, Sci.
   Prog., Oxf., 55, pp. 379-400; Stebbins, G. L. (1967). Adaptive radiation
   and trends of evolution in higher plants. Evolutionary Biology, 1, pp.
    101-42.
 4 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
   Chapter 3; Klatt, B. (1927). Entstehung der Haustiere, in Baur, E. and
   Hartmann, M. (eds.) Handbuch der Vererbungswissenchaft, 3. Berlin.
 5 Robinson, R. (1965). Genetics of the Norway Rat. London.
 6 Donaldson, H. H. (1924). The Rat: Data and Reference Tables. 2nd ed.
   Philadelphia.
 7 Richter, C. P. (1954). The effects of domestication and selection on the
   behaviour of the Norway rat, J. nat. Cancer Inst., 15, pp. 727-38.
 8 King, H. D. and Donaldson, H. H. (1929). Life processes and size of body
   and organs of the gray Norway rat during ten generations in captivity,
   Amer. anat. Mem., No. 14; King, H. D. (1939). Life processes in gray
   Norway rats during fourteen years in captivity, Amer. anat. Mem., No. 17.
 9 Batten, C. A. and Berry, R. J. (1967). Parental mortality in wild-caught
   house mice, J. anim. Ecol., 36, pp. 453-63.
10 Farris, E. J. and Yeakel, E. H. (1943). The susceptibility of albino and
   gray Norway rats to audiogenic seizures, J. comp. Psychol., 35, pp. 73-80;
   Farris, E. J. and Yeakel, E. H. (1945). Emotional behaviour of gray
   Norway and Wistar albino rats, J. comp. Psychol., 38, pp. 109-18.
11 Keeler, C. E. and King, H. D. (1942). Multiple effects of coat colour
   genes in the Norway rat, with special reference to temperament and
   domestication,^ comp. Psychol., 34, pp. 241-50.
12 Keeler, C. E. (1942). The association of the black (non-agouti) gene with
   behaviour in the Norway rat, J. Hered., 33, pp. 371-84.
13 Stone, C. P. (1932). Wildness and savageness in rats of different strains,
   in Lashley, K. S. (ed.) Studies in the Dynamics of Behaviour. Chicago.
14 Bendig, A. W. and Braun, H. W. (1951). The influence of the genotype on
   the retention of a maze habit in the rat following electroshock convulsions,
   J. comp. Physiol. Psychol., 44, pp. 112-17.
15 Broadhurst, P. L. (i960). Studies in psychogenetics: applications of bio¬
   metrical genetics to the inheritance of behaviour, in Eysenck, K. J. (ed.)
   Experiments in Personality. I. Psychogenetics and Psychopharmacology.
   London.
16 Richter, C. P. (1954). ibid.
17 De Beer, G. R. (1958). Embryos and Ancestors. 3rd ed. Oxford.
18 Spurway, H. (1952). Can wild animals be kept in captivity ?, New Biology,
   13, pp. 11-30.
19 Mayr, E. (1954). Change of genetic environment and evolution, in Huxley,
   J., Hardy, A. C. and Ford, E. B. (eds.) Evolution as a Process. London.
   Kurten, B. (1959). Rates of evolution in fossil mammals, Cold Spring
   Harbour Symp. quant. Biol., 24, pp. 205-15.
20 Foster, J. B. (1964). Evolution of mammals on islands, Nature, Bond., 202,
   pp. 234-5.
21 Lloyd, H. G. Personal communication.
22 Berry, R. J., Evans, I. M. and Sennitt, B. F. C. (1967). The relationships
216   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals        berry


         and ecology of Apodemus sylvaticus from the Small Isles of the Inner
         Hebrides,$Scotland, J. Zool. Lond., 152, pp. 333-46; Berry, unpublished.
      23 Berry, R. J. (1964). The evolution of an island population of the house
         mouse. Evolution, 18, pp. 468-83.
      24 Cook, L. M. (1961). The edge effect in population genetics, Amer. Nat.,
         95, pp. 295-307; Corbet, G. B. (1961). Origin of the British insular races of
         small mammals and of the “Lusitanian” fauna, Nature, Lond., 191, pp.
         1037-40.
      25 Crowcroft, P. and Rowe, F. P. (1961). The weights of wild house mice
         (.Mus musculus L.) living in confined colonies, Proc. zool. Soc., Lond., 136,
         pp. 177-85.
      26 Baker, H. G. and Stebbins, G. L. (1965). (eds.) The Genetics of Colonizing
         Species. New York and London.
      27 Mayr. E. (1954). ibid.; Berry, R. J. (1967). Genetical changes in mice and
         men, Eug. Rev., 59, pp. 78-96; Parsons, P. A., Hosgood, S. M. W. and Lee,
         B. T. O. (1967). Polygenes and polymorphism, Molec. Gen. Genet., 99,
         pp. 165-70.
      28 W. H. C. (1964). Genetics of vectors and insecticide resistance, Wld. Hlth.
         Org. techn.. Rep. Ser., 268, 40 pp.
      29 Berry, R. J. (1964). ibid.; Berry, R. J. (1967). ibid.
      30 Searle, A. G. (1964). The gene-geography of cats. J. Cat Genet., 1 (5), pp.
         18-24.
      31 Delany, M. I. (1964). Variation in the Long-tailed field-mouse (.Apodemus
         sylvaticus L.) in north-west Scotland. I. Comparison of individual
         characters, Proc. roy. Soc. B., 161, pp. 191-9; Berry, R. T., Evans, I. M.
         and Sennitt, B. F. C. (1967). ibid.
      32 Dunn, L. C., Beasley, A. B. and Tinker, H. (i960). Polymorphisms in
         populations of wild house mice,J. Mammal., 41, pp. 220-9.
      33 Brothwell, D. R., Carbonell, V. M. and Goose, D. H. (1963). Congenital
         absence of teeth in human populations, in Brothwell, D. R. (ed.) Dental
         Anthropology. London; Berry, R. J. (1968). The biology of non-metrical
         variation in mice and men, in Brothwell, D. R. (ed.) The Skeletal Biology
         of Earlier Human Populations. London.
      34 Polman, A. (1950). Anencephaly, spina bifida and hydrocephaly. A
         contribution to our knowledge of the causal genesis of congenital mal¬
         formations, Genetica, 25, pp. 29-78; Blumberg, B. S. (1961). (ed.)
         Genetic Polymorphisms and Geographic Variations in Disease. New York
         and London; Berry, R. J. (1961). Genetically controlled degeneration of
         the nucleus pulposus in the mouse, J. Bone jt. Surg., 43B, pp. 387-93;
         Berry, R. J. (1967). ibid.
      35 Dunn, L. C. (1955). Widespread distribution of mutant alleles (r-alleles)
         in populations of wild house mice. Nature, Lond., 176, pp. 1275-6; Berry,
         R. J. (1964). ibid.
      36 Lerner, I. M. (1954). Genetic Homeostasis. Edinburgh.
      37 Harris, H. (1966). Enzyme polymorphisms in man, Proc. roy. Soc. B., 164,
         pp. 298-310); Lewontin, R. C. and Hubby, J. L. (1966). A molecular
         approach to the study of genic heterozygosity in natural populations. II.
         Amount of variation and degree of heterozygosity in natural populations of
         Drosophila pseudoobscura. Genetics, 54, pp. 595-609; Milkman, R. D.
         (i967)- Heterosis as a major cause of heterozygosity in nature, Genetics, 55,
         PP- 493-5-
      38 Mather, K. (1943). Polygenic inheritance and natural selection, Biol. Rev.,
         r8, pp. 32-64; Mather, K. (1953). The genetical structure of populations.
         Symp. Soc. exp. Biol., 7, pp. 76-95.
      39 Haldane, J. B. S. (1959). Natural selection, in Bell, P. R. (ed.) Darwin's
         Biological Work. Cambridge; Berry, R. J. and Crothers, J. H. (1968).
               The genetical implications of domestication in animals      217


   Stabilizing selection in the Dog whelk (Nucella lapillus), J. Zool., Lond.,
   i55> PP- 5-17-
40 Kettlewell, H. B. D. (1961). The phenomenon of industrial melanism in
   Lepidoptera, Ann. Rev. Entomol., 6, pp. 245-62; Dobzhansky, T. (1963).
   Genetics of natural populations. XXXIII. A progress report on genetic
   changes in populations of Drosophila pseudoobscura and Drosophila persi-
   milis in a locality in California, Evolution, 17, pp. 333-9.
41 Bader, R. S. (1956). Variability in wild and inbred mammalian popula¬
   tions, Quart. J. Fla. Acad. Sci., 19, pp. 14-34.
42 Fisher, R. A. (1935). Dominance in poultry, Phil. Trans, roy. Soc. B., 225,
   pp. 195-226.
43 Howard, W. E. (1949). A means to distinguish skulls of coyotes and
   domestic dogs, J. Mammal., 30, pp. 169-71.
44 Spurway, H. (1952). ibid.
45 Leopold, A. S. (1944). The nature of heritable wildness in turkeys.
   Condor, 46, pp. 133-97; Gillett, J. D. (1967). Natural selection and feeding
   speed in a blood-sucking insect, Proc. roy. Soc. B., 167, pp. 316-29.
46 My thanks are due to Mr. D. R. Brothwell, Professor H. Griineberg, Dr.
   P. A. Jewell and Dr. A. G. Searle for their comments and criticisms, and
   to Mr. A. J. Lee for drawing the figure.
      S. BOKONYI

      Archaeological problems and methods of recognizing
      animal domestication

Domestication is an extremely complicated process. In essence it is nothing
other than man’s special interference in the life of certain animal species, but
this interference has been really varied. Although man has interfered in the life
of some animal species by hunting them or driving them out from their
living places, (for example, the cave bear in the Pleistocene) from a very early
date, domestication is an interference of a quite different kind. There is no
doubt that the purpose of earliest domestication was to secure animal protein
reserve for the human population, that the domesticated animals served as
living food conserves, and finally that man killed these animals just as he did his
other quarry, the wild animals. But capturing animals, keeping them in
corrals and killing them at the appropriate time does not amount to domesti¬
cation; domestication implies something more. Its essential criterion is
that man intends to breed the captured individuals of a certain wild species.
The word “domestication” presumes the propagation of animals that man
keeps in captivity, or more exactly man’s breeding of animals under artificial
conditions. And this is a real difference in comparison to the wild, hunted
animals, for in connection with the latter, primitive man had only one
purpose: to kill as many of them as possible.'
  I would define the essence of domestication as: 5 the capture and taming by
man of animals of a species with particular behavioural characteristics, their
removal from their natural living area and breeding community, and their
maintenance under controlled breeding conditions for profit.'
  In this respect it seems useful to examine the main phases of animal breed¬
ing that began with domestication. One can distinguish two main phases
(i) animal keeping, and (2) animal breeding.
 1 Animal keeping is the primitive form of animal breeding without purpose¬
ful selection or the control of feeding. Its most important characteristics are
that: (a) in a given population there is only one breed, and (b) the domestic
animals are of a primitive type and—in the case of mammals—their size is
small in comparison to that of the wild form. The origins of selective breeding,
220   Part II    Domestication and exploitation of animals    B0K0NYI



 however, do go back to prehistoric times, for with the introduction of castra¬
 tion of some males (from the late neolithic on) man was practising a certain
selection (i.e. he selected some males for breeding and excluded others).
 However, this process was not conscious selection for higher productivity
 (e.g. for size, strength, speed, meat production, milk yield, wool, etc.).'
    The basis of real 'animal breeding is purposeful selective breeding and the
 control of both quantity and quality of feeding. It begins when man treats his
 domestic animals as individuals and not only as a herd. The beginnings of
 real animal breeding varied in time for different species^ it started earlier for
horse and dog than for cattle. It was first applied to all domestic animals in
classical Greece and was widely practised by the Romans. With the fall of the
Roman Empire, real animal breeding disappeared but it has become dominant
again since the Late Middle Ages.'The best criteria for recognizing this
advanced phase are: (a) that different breeds live together in a population,
(b) that the size of animals increases but dwarf breeds also appear, and (c) that
the productivity of animals increases.'
    Domestication as a process involves three main factors: the man who
carries it out, the wild animal that has been domesticated, and the domesti¬
cated animal that is the result. At first, one might think that it is only man
who is the positive factor: he influences the animal, he transforms it from the
wild state into the domesticated one, he multiplies its numbers, he takes it to
distant regions, he restricts or kills off its wild forms, etc. This is undoubtedly
the main line of development but beside this the whole process includes a
range of complex interactions. These influences can be clearly seen not only
on the domesticated animal—both on the individuals and on the whole
populations—but also on the wild ancestors and even on man, on human
populations and on the whole society.
    There is no need to enumerate in detail these effects and changes for other
papers in this book deal with them. But it is useful to examine the whole
picture and in this way to try to determine for example what kind of differ¬
ences existed between the fauna of prehistoric sites with animal keeping
(apart from hunting) and the fauna of early sites with local domestication
(apart from hunting and with or without animal keeping). It would be very
interesting to examine questions like: what kind of factors determine the
animal husbandry of a certain prehistoric culture, or in what ways are the
qualitative and quantitative features of animal husbandry characteristic of a
certain prehistoric culture or period, or to what extent can the origin, relation¬
ship, and movement of animals and peoples be determined from the type and
development of animal husbandry and from its relation to hunting, etc. These
questions have been rather neglected in recent research, and are therefore very
well worth discussing.
  With regard to the first question, there is certain evidence for animal
keeping on a prehistoric settlement if:
             Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication   221

1 the proportion of age groups of a domesticable species is not the same as
  found normally in the wild population;
2 the proportions of the sexes of a domesticable species is not the same as
  found normally in the wild population;
3 domesticated species appear which have no wild ancestors in that particular
  region, at least since the Pleistocene;
4 morphological changes appear in domesticated animals;
5 there are artistic representations of domesticated animals;
6 there are objects associated with animal husbandry.

Among these criteria the last four are the most reliable but the first two are
the most interesting. The last four require that a certain time has passed
during which either domesticated species spread to distant areas, or morpho¬
logical changes developed1. Although it is well known nowadays that the time
required for such a development is not very long (in South-west Asia hornless
sheep and goats with twisted horns appeared as early as the eighth millennium
B.C., and longifrons-/brachyceros-/cattle were identified in the Carpathian
Basin in the sixth millennium B.C., and a good example of how fast domestic
animals have spread is that sheep and goat and probably pig arrived in
south-eastern Europe from their centre of domestication in South-west Asia
as early as the seventh millennium B.C.), it is vital that reliable methods for
distinguishing domesticated animals from their wild ancestors in the early
period of domestication, when morphological changes had not yet developed,
should be found. At the same time it is vital that such methods should be
found for those species where morphological changes occurred only thousands
of years after their first domestication (e.g. the horse).
  Arcikhowski2 was the first to attempt to distinguish wild and domesticated
forms on the basis of differences in the proportions of age and sex groups.
According to Arcikhowski tthe appearance of very old animals, the equal
proportion of males and females and the lack of vertebrae and breast-bones
indicated a wild population, while on the other hand the lack of old animals,
the overwhelming majority of females (a great part of the males were killed as
young animals or castrated; castration was introduced in animal keeping quite
early) and the occurrence of whole skeletons indicated a domesticated
population. 1 This is without doubt a very intelligent principle by which to
distinguish populations especially because it associates the differences in age
and sex proportions with the occurrence or lack of certain kinds of bones (the
hunter leaves the parts of the body which are poor at the place of killing,
whereas domesticated animals are killed actually on the sites and their whole
skeletons are therefore found in situ), and it could probably be extended to
the study of the very early domestication of sheep and goats.
   Perkins3 deduced the domesticated state of the sheep of the proto-neolithic
(10,870 ± 300 b.p.) Zawi Chemi Shanidar from the sudden increase of the
proportion of immature animals. Coon4 was the first who advanced the thesis
222   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    bokonyi


that a high proportion of young animal bones was a proof of a domesticated
population, and this has increasingly become an axiom particularly in Near
Eastern archaeology. But Hopkins5 has proved by statistical methods that in
this respect there were significant differences between the uppermost
(Bx == proto-neolithic) and the next (C = Baradostian) layer of Shanidar
Cave, and that the difference between layer C and the layers at Zawi Chemi
Shanidar was also significant, but that the difference between the lowermost
layer D (Mousterian!) of the cave and the top two layers of Zawi Chemi was
not significant. “No one, I think, would argue that the Neanderthals from
Shanidar Cave were domesticating sheep, and yet statistically they may have
been killing a high percentage of immature animals”6, but it is possible that the
high proportion of young animals was somehow connected with a special
type of hunting. Despite this, I am of the opinion that an increase in the
number of immature animals in an early neolithic site shows (however
incompletely) evidence of domestication, simply because in somewhat later
periods of the neolithic this has occurred together with morphological
changes in undoubtedly domesticated populations. I am convinced that it
would be useful to combine this method—like that of Arcikhowski7—with
the study of changes in sex groups and of the spectrum of bone kinds.
  We have so far looked at the evidence which shows that animals were kept
on prehistoric settlements. The next step is to determine what kinds of proof
of local domestication can be found in the material found on a prehistoric site.
This has a special importance not only for the determination of early domesti¬
cation but also for secondary domestication in later times. It is well known
that the progress of domestication did not end with the taming of the first
animals; on the contrary, as the techniques of domestication spread man tried
to tame the wild animals of new and different regions. On the other hand,
throughout the neolithic man was forced to domesticate, because at that
period when animal husbandry was still incipient and hunting was gradually
on the decrease it would have been impossible to supply the growing human
population with meat and at the same time to increase the domestic stock.
 Moreover neolithic man recognized quite early that domesticated stock was
 the basis of “wealth”, and he attempted to raise it as efficiently as he could.
 And this led again to domestication. And at last when at the end of the
 neolithic he discovered new uses for his domesticated animals (milk, wool,
 draught, etc.) there broke out a “fever of domestication” in the whole of
 Europe8. When at the end of this “fever” the aurochs, the wild ancestor of
 the most important domesticated animals of Central and Western Europe at
 that time, was getting rarer man switched over to the swine which has been
 domesticated till the most recent times. Despite this switch the aurochs was
 still domesticated after prehistoric times, albeit very rarely. Virgil mentioned
 that in North Italy after a cattle epizootic the peasants captured and domesti¬
 cated aurochs to replace their domestic stock. Likewise, mediaeval chronicles
 record that an aurochs bull, which was captured and tamed in Hungary, was
              Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication     223

used to draw in the heavy foundation-stones of the cathedral of Strassbourg9
and its horn still hung on one of the pillars of the cathedral till the Great
French Revolution.
  And now the question: what is the evidence for local domestication in the
material of a site ?

1 Remains of both wild and domesticated forms on the site.
2 The existence of transitional forms between the wild ancestor and the
  domesticated animal.
3 Changes in the proportions of age and sex groups in the wild form.
4 Representations of scenes of capture.

The first point needs no further explanation. As regards the second point,
transitional forms can be of two different kinds: (a) hybrids of the wild and
domesticated form, (b) newly domesticated individuals (more common). If
there exist skulls, or larger skull fragments, in the case of cattle it is not too
difficult to distinguish the two types10. While the second type is a small-scale
form of the wild cattle, the first type shows none of the well determined and
rather standard proportions of the wild form. It has for example large horns
on a small skull or, exactly the contrary, long horns with a wavy frontal ridge
between the horns, or an uneven forehead, etc. (Such a disproportion was
probably characteristic of the whole body but until now we have no whole
skeletons to prove this.)
   In the case of local domestication, transitional individuals bridge the
differences between the wild and domestic forms of a particular animal
species. For sheep and goats this question has yet to be studied; however
such types should be identifiable at least in the form, cross-section, twisting,
etc., of the horns. However, in the case of pig and cattle, transitional indi¬
viduals can already be very well identified. In the case of pig and cattle,
domestication causes a considerable decrease of size which can be recognized
in the extremity bones which are found abundantly on prehistoric settle¬
ments. In the cattle material of a settlement without local cattle domestication
(Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Siid, Switzerland, early neolithic, Cortaillod cul¬
ture11) there is a gap between the series of measurements of wild and domestic
cattle. On the other hand, on a site with large-scale cattle domestication
(Berettyoszentmarton, Hungary, late neolithic, Herpaly12) there are many
transitional forms. On the frequency diagrams for the cattle bones of this
site these animals are transitional between the wild and domesticated cattle.
The differences between the two sites are shown in Table 1.
   Transitional forms like these occur also among the pigs of prehistoric
European sites but as the pig was generally far rarer than cattle in pre¬
historic sites, its domestication was less important, and its numbers were
much smaller.
   On sites with local domestication there are interesting changes in the
proportions of age and sex of wild formsi Modem experiments prove, and
224    Part // Domestication and exploitation of animals           bokonyi


  Metacarpus
  Breadth of proximal end                   50-51 52-53 54-55 56-57 58-59 60-61 62-63
                         f
Seeberg, Burgaschisee- domesticated           221                 4000

  Sud,0)                 \wild                000                 0000
„      ,       ,    ...^ f.-
                           domesticated       000                 13            3      3
Berettyoszentmarton w -                       000                 0000
                         \ wild

  Metacarpus
  Breadth of proximal end                   64-65 66-67 68-69 70-71 72-73 74-75
„ ,      _              , f domesticated      000000
Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud < w-^               013420

„      ,      ,          I
                   ... domesticated
Berettyoszentmartonw<,
                                              340000
                                              o     o      1      5      1      1

  Metacarpus
  Breadth of proximal end                   76-77 78-79 80-81 82-83 84-85 86-87
                                              000                 000
Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud^d^est*cated

Beretty6szentmarton(4)
                         {   domesticated
                             wild
                                              100
                                              000
                                              360
                                                                  000
                                                                  000
                                                                  1 o 1

Table 1
  (а) Boessneck, J., Jequier, P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschisee-Sud. Die
      Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3).
  (б) Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn und das Problem der
      Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung., 14, pp. 175-214; Bokonyi, S. and
      Kubasiewicz, M. (1961). Neolithische Tiere Polens und Ungarns in Ausgrabungen, I. Das
      Hausrind. Budapest-Szczecin.


there is also prehistoric evidence for this, that only young animals can be
domesticated. Therefore prehistoric man had to capture young animals to
tame them. But, on the other hand, the wild adult individuals tried to protect
their young, and man had therefore to kill the adults in order to capture the
young. Consequently it is logical that in the material of sites with large-scale
domestication there should be only a few (or even no) bones of immature wild
individuals and that the overwhelming majority of the domesticable wild
species should be adult, mature or even senile animals. And this is exactly
what we find. For example at Berettyoszentmarton (with large-scale cattle
domestication) among 1106 aurochs bones of identifiable age there were only
ninety-five (8-6%) immature individuals and ion (91-4%) of adult and
senile animals. On the other hand, at Seeberg-Burgaschisee-Siid (without
cattle domestication) 26% (judging from the mandibles, even 55%) of the
aurochs bones were of immature individuals13. This latter example shows
clearly that this type of selection did not operate and that, on the contrary,
the hunters tried to kill the young animals which were the easier prey.
   In the wild the proportion of male and female animals is normally 1:1.
This ratio should also exist in the bone material of the wild ancestors of the
domesticated animals in prehistoric sites. But in one form of hunting14
which eventually led to domestication, man began to husband the wild herd
just like his domesticated stock; he protected the herd against its natural
enemies (amongst which were other human hordes), saved the young and
female individuals, and if he wanted to kill any he chose the old animals, and
              Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication     225
                                   1

 first of all the superfluous males. There is a good example of this at the site of
 Asiab (West Iran, c. eighth millennium b.c.) with its very beginning of goat
 domestication. At this site judging from horn cores, there were almost only
 male individuals among the wild goats. Or again in Berettyoszentmarton the
 greatest number of the aurochs bones were of bulls, while in Seeberg-
 Burgaschisse-Siid bones of aurochs cows were probably in the majority.
    As for representations of the capture of animals these are comparatively
 late. For example, the famous golden cups of Vaphio (1550-1450 B.C.) show
the capture of bulls at a time when cattle had been domesticated for at least
4500 years (and it is not even sure if the bulls represented were really wild
 animals).
    It is obvious that of the four criteria mentioned above it is the second one
 which is of decisive importance. In other words dt is the occurrence of
 transitional individuals which is the best evidence for local domestication.
 Domestic stock, individuals with well-determined criteria of advanced domes¬
 tication are theoretically not essential.) But only theoretically, because in
 practice there are some sites where such an initial stage of domestication is
 not observable. The same is true for the changes in the proportions of age
 and sex groups of the wild forms. These changes are associated only with that
 type of domestication which developed from hunting. But since the domesti¬
 cation of the most important animals has its origin in hunting, there can be no
 doubt that these types of changes can be observed in the populations of wild
 ancestors if there is enough bone material available. (
    The third group of questions concerns the relations between man, human
population, society and domestication and animal husbandry. To study these
 questions it is necessary to examine the animal husbandry of the whole
prehistoric and early historic population in a certain area. The Carpathian
Basin, and particularly Hungary, seems to be a good territory for this purpose.
The Carpathian Basin is a closed geographical unit, and Hungary has
roughly homogeneous environmental and climatic conditions. Furthermore,
and particularly important, the bone material of Hungary’s c. 400 pre¬
historic and early historic sites was studied with the same method and from
the same view points. (This material also served very well as a basis for
synthesizing the material of Central and Eastern Europe.) In these investiga¬
tions only the material from settlements was used, for it was this material
that accurately reflected not only the qualitative but also the quantitative
composition of the domesticated fauna. The essence of the method was
the study qualitatively, and above all quantitatively, of the species in the
domesticated fauna. They (together with the hunted fauna) give us valuable
information about the development of one of the most important sections of
the economy. It can be proved that the great periods of prehistory and early
history and many prehistoric cultures or groups of cultures, had their own
typical animal husbandry (which is reflected in the proportions of domesti¬
cated species). And this husbandry was at least as characteristic of them as
226   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals              bokonyi


the form or decoration of their pottery, etc. The great periods of prehistory
and of early history (and in some cases their sub-phases and even certain
cultures) can be very well distinguished from each other on the basis of the
development of their animal husbandry.
   The species composition of animal husbandry also yields information
about the relationship and migrations of cultures; e.g. the relations of the
neolithic of South-west Asia and that of Greece are well-known. At Argissa-
Maghula15 and Nea Nikomedeia16, the two early neolithic settlements in
Greece, with animal bones which have been identified, the proportions of
species in the domesticated fauna are the same: an animal husbandry based on
sheep and goat as in the early neolithic of South-west Asia. The domesticated
fauna contains at least 70% sheep and goat, while pig and catde (the latter in
all likelihood domesticated first in South-west Europe in the seventh millen¬
nium b.c.) are far less common, and dog seems to be extremely rare. The same
form of animal husbandry extended as far as the Northern Balkans and even
as far as the Carpathian Basin (see Table 2). But while the early neolithic
people of the Southern Balkans hardly hunted, in the wet and swampy
environment of the Carpathian Basin they acquired a quite considerable
part of their meat by hunting and fishing. The original type of animal
husbandry was deeply rooted in the traditions of the human population for
they clung to it even in an unfavourable environment (sheep and goat
were not animals of the swamps). And this is the best evidence to show that
in this case we are dealing with the migration northwards of a type of animal
husbandry together with a human group and not the simple taking over of a
particular domesticated species. Beyond the Carpathian Basin this type of
animal husbandry based on sheep and goat is not found.
   This alien form of animal husbandry was unable to develop further (for lack

                         Wild     Domesticated
                        animals     animals       Cattle   Sheep/goat     Pig      Dog
                           0/           0/          0/          0/         O/       0/
                           /o           /o          /o          /o         /o       /o
Argissa-Maghula(a)         0-92       99-08         4-76      84-15       9.99     0-18
  (Greece)
Nea Nikomedeia<t)          Too        93-00        14-55      70-45      14-77     0-23
  (Greece)
Ludas-Budzak             20-92        7908         13-13      86-13       0-37     0-37
  (Yugoslavia)
Maroslele-Pana           3296         67-04        26-52      70-16       1-66     i-66
  (Hungary)
Gyalaret                 2695         73-05        30-37      63-56       4-67     1-40
  (Hungary)
Roszke-Ludvar            59'iB        40-89        1796       76-41       1-64     399
  (Hungary)
Deszk-Olajkut             19-84       8o-i6        29-39      70-21       0-20     0-20
  (Hungary)

Table 2
  (a) Boessneck, J. (1961). Haustierfunde prakeramisch-neolithischer Zeit aus Thessalien,
       Z. Tierzucht. ZiichtBiol., 76, pp. 39-42.
  (£>) Higgs, E. S. (1962). The fauna of the early neolithic site at Nea Nikomedeia, Greek
       Macedonia, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 28, pp. 271—4.
             Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication         227

of domesticable wild forms of its leading elements, the sheep and goat) and
was unable to maintain itself later than the end of the first third of the
neolithic. From this time on cultures of local origin developed their own forms
of animal husbandry. These were based on cattle and pig, animals which had
their wild forms in the Carpathian Basin, and could therefore be domesticated
locally. In this type of animal husbandry, cattle were the leading element and
pig generally occupied the second place. These cultures practised large-scale
domestication, with which their hunting was also associated: aurochs was the
main hunted animal (see the second group of questions above: the adult
animals were killed and the young ones captured).
   The late neolithic cultures which had a local origin (Herpaly culture,
Lengyel culture, etc.) practised a similar form of animal husbandry. Their
settlements are, however, easily distinguishable from earlier ones on the basis
of the sudden increase of hunting. This was connected with a new “fever of
domestication” with a large-scale domestication of cattle.
   And so for every period and phase of Hungarian prehistory there is a
typical form of animal husbandry reflected in the particular proportions of
 the animal species.
   There is yet another question: what kind of information can the type of
 animal husbandry found tell us about the migrations of cultures or peoples ?
 There is another good example from the Carpathian Basin: during the
 Holocene there were three important south-eastern incursions into this
 region. The first was the Koros culture at the beginning of the neolithic, the
 second the Badener culture at the end of the Copper Age or at the beginning
 of the Bronze Age, and lastly the Turks at the end of the Middle Ages.
 Despite the gaps of three thousand years between these incursions all three
 brought with them exactly the same form of animal husbandry based on
 sheep and goats (see Table 3). The bone material of their settlements can
 only be distinguished by the domestic breeds kept on them, by the occurrence
 of horse and domestic birds on Turkish sites, and by the decrease in hunting.

                                  Domesti-
                         Wild      cated               Sheep/                  Horse/
                        animals   animals     Cattle    goat    Pig     Dog    birds
                          0/
                          /o      '
                                       0/
                                       /o
                                                0/
                                                /o
                                                         0/
                                                         /o
                                                                0/o/     0/
                                                                         /o
                                                                                 0/
                                                                                 /o

Koros cultura            33-60        66-40   21*00    77-31    0-72    0-97
  (average)
Budapest-Andor utca       6-8i        9319    34-31    41-72    22-58   1-29    —
  (Badener culture)
Buda-Pasha palace         1-03        9897    10-45    86-i6     0-35   0-48    2-56
  (Turkish)

 Table 3

  The proportions of species in a domesticated fauna also tell us something
about the way of life of certain human populations. It is quite clear that
nomadic peoples firstly breed animals which can easily be driven, while, on
the other hand, settled peoples keep mainly animals which can be confined. ^
228   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   bokonyi


Adaptation of animal husbandry to changes in ways of living is clearly seen
from the Early Middle Ages. From the point of view of animal husbandry the
early mediaeval settlements of Central and Eastern Europe can be divided into
two groups. The first group consists of the Slavonic and German villages and
towns, while the second group includes the Hungarian villages and the
settlements of certain newly settled peoples of the Pontic region. The animal
husbandry of the first group was characterized by having pig and cattle
(alternately) as its leading elements, whereas sheep and goat were much
rarer, and horse was either very rare or entirely absent. In the animal
husbandry of the second group, cattle or sheep/goat were the most common
domesticated animals, and the horse also was common, whereas pig was
extremely rare. Certain differences in the uses of the domesticated animals
existed in the two groups. For example, the horse was not eaten by people of
the first group, whereas it was eaten by people of the second group, and
whilst for the people of the first group cattle were almost exclusively
draught animals, they were also kept for meat by people of the second group,
etc. There was no essential difference between the animal husbandry of the
Slavs and Germans in the first group or that of the Hungarians and Pontic
peoples in the second group. This shows that the differences between the
animal husbandry of the two groups were not of ethnic origin, but existed
simply as a result of changes in the way of life, slowly followed by changes in
the animal husbandry of the newly settled peoples.
   Since Celtic and Roman times setdement types and the class-structure
have also caused changes in the animal husbandry. There are fundamental
differences between the domesticated fauna of Celtic villages and towns
(oppidums) and that of Roman villas, castles, military stations or native
villages. (It was in the Celtic towns, Roman villas and castles that the first
beginnings of a civilized way of life occurred, while in Celdc villages, Roman
military stations and native villages under Roman rule, people continued
their prehistoric way of life.) In the Middle Ages there were sharp differences
between the animal husbandry of villages, towns, royal or episcopal residences
and the nobleman’s manor-houses. The animal husbandry of villages always
lagged behind that of towns, etc., but in addition to this the animal husbandry
of towns demanded emphasis on those species which did not need too much
place and did not require too much food (e.g. pig, hen). In general it has been
the hen which has been the domestic animal of urbanization since the Celts. A
difference caused by the class-structure was that since the Romans, imported
animals (peacock, guinea-fowl, etc.) have appeared in the animal husbandry
of villas, royal residences, etc.
   The problems discussed in this paper are only a small sample of the
questions which arise in connection with domestication and early animal
breeding. Some of them have been touched upon also in other papers, but I
think it has been useful to raise them in this way because I am convinced that
approaching these questions from different angles can help to solve them.
        Archaeological problems of recognizing animal domestication        229




Notes
 1 Unfortunately animal representations and objects connected with animal
   husbandry (e.g. bridles) appear quite late in the archaeological record.
 2 Arcikhowski, A. W. (1947). Introduction to Archaeology. (In Russian.)
   Moscow.
 3 Perkins, D. (1964). Prehistoric fauna from Shanidar, Iraq, Science, 144,
   pp. 1565-6.
 4 Coon, C. S. (1951). Cave Explorations in Iran, 1949. Philadelphia.
 5 Hopkins, J. (1967). Identification of the domestication of animals without
   morphological changes. Manuscript, Chicago.
 6 Hopkins, J. (1957). ibid.
 7 Arcikhowski, A. W. (1947). ibid.
 8 Bokonyi, S. (1968). The Historical Development of Animal Breeding in
   Central and Eastern Europe. (In Hungarian with English summary.)
   Agrartort, Szemle.
 9 Szalay, B. (n.d.). The Hungarian aurochs. The history of the aurochs
   (Bosprimigenius Boj.) in Hungary. (In Hungarian.) Manuscript.
10 Bokonyi, S. (1962). Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn und das
   Problem der Domestikation des Hausrindes, Acta Arch. Hung., 14, pp.
   I75-2I4-
11 Boessneck, J., Jequier, P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). Seeberg, Burgaschi-
   see-Siid. Die Tierreste, Acta Bernensia, 2 (3). Bern.
12 Bokonyi, S. (1959). Die fruhalluviale Wirbeltierfauna Ungarms. (Vom
   Neolithikum bis zur La Tene-Zeit), Acta Arch. Hung., 2, pp. 39-102.
13 Boessneck, J., Jequier, P. and Stampfli, H. R. (1963). ibid.
14 Pohlhausen, H. (1953). Nachweisbare Ansatze zum Wanderhirtentum
   in der niederdeutschen Mittelsteinzeit, Z. f. Ethnol., 78, pp. 64-82.
   Begleiten.
15 Boessneck, J. (1962). Die Tierreste aus der Argissa-Magula vom prakera-
   mischen Neolithikum bis zur mittleren Bronzezeit. Die deutschen Aus-
   grabungen auf der Argissa-Magula in Thessalien. Bonn.
16 Higgs, E. S. (1962). The fauna of the early neolithic site at Nea Nikomedeia
   Greek Macedonia, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 28, pp. 271-4.
      RAYMOND E. CHAPLIN

       The use of non-morphological criteria in the study of
      animal domestication from bones found on archaeo¬
      logical sites

 The study of the history of man’s exploitation of animals is severely hampered
 by our lack of knowledge concerning the biology of the species involved and
 the dearth of adequately documented specimens from archaeological excava¬
 tions.
. Many studies concerned with the recognition of animal domestication from
 bones have relied on morphological criteria. This is not surprising since the
 problem has generally been approached from an anatomical standpoint.
 These criteria are however of limited value when studying the sequence
 leading to, and the consequences of, domestication.
    The morphological approach presupposes that changes produced by
 domestication will be reflected in the skeleton. In practice it would appear
 that only a few bones of the body may be so affected. Morphological changes
 which may be observed are not necessarily a result of domestication and it is
therefore desirable that contemporary examples of wild species from the
 same region should be available to ascertain whether other factors may be
involved. These points have generally been ignored by archaeologists despite
the clear evidence of rapid changes in the size of wild species in the post¬
glacial period1. Until contemporary deposits of true wild animals have been
found and studied (as opposed to those bones found on excavations and
identified as wild) the interpretation of changes observed in the bones, as
being the result of domestication, can be no more than speculation. It is of
course also necessary to demonstrate that such changes are not part of the
normal variation within the population associated with sex and age or due to
the simultaneous exploitation of different populations. Problems like these
can only be satisfactorily worked out on a few types of bone which usually
form but a small proportion of a large quantity of fragments. As a result of
this, the study of domestication on many sites had had to be done with
samples that were totally inadequate for the problems involved. These
cautions emphasize once again both the need for anatomical and ecological
investigations of living populations to provide objective data on relevant
9—DOPAA   *   *
232   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CHAPLIN

species and the need for the excavation of palaeozoological deposits rather
than just cultural ones2.
    Even where sample size requirements are met, morphological criteria only
permit the recognition of a late stage in the domestication story. The earliest
stage recognizable is that where changes have been produced and this is at an
unknown distance in time or space from the initial success. The answers to
such questions as when and how domestication occurred can only come from
a study of earlier material in the stratigraphical sequence using other criteria.
    Another aspect of the problem of morphological criteria is concerned with
the sequence of domestication. If the changes being studied are the product
of say twenty-five generations, the length of time involved will vary between
species. The time required to produce a given number of generations is a
product of the time from birth to puberty plus the gestation period of
the next offspring. In roe deer, for example, the generation time is 14
months (birth to puberty) plus 10 months (gestation), the first offspring
being produced 24 months after the birth of the parent. In red deer
this is 36 or 48 months, depending on puberty3. Another vital factor in
this, for example, is the degree of selection pressure that was being
exerted; pigs, for example, still strongly resembled their wild ancestors in
Europe long after specialized strains of sheep, cattle and horses had been
developed. This is of course a gross oversimplification of the problem since
it is unwise to make interspecific comparisons of such variable phenomena. It
does however serve to underline the fact that our view of the sequence may
be distorted by the use of morphological criteria.
    If we are to study the events leading to domestication and its significance to
the community, a method of recognizing domestication4 and of quantifying
all animal exploitation is necessary. Domestication is only a pattern of animal
exploitation and can therefore be recognized by reference to the parameters
which define that pattern. In studying domestication it is also necessary to
consider certain specialized usage patterns which, whilst they may not consti¬
tute domestication, may usefully be termed incipient domestication.
    For ungulates in particular, the following parameters may be used to
characterize the nature and scale of the exploitation.

1 The species involved
2 The minimum number of each species
3 The age of these animals
4 The sex of these animals
5 The frequency of the different bones of each species
6 The size of the animals.

   In the methodology outlined below the species involved, the number of
animals and their age and sex are essential parameters. At this point I would
like to make some general observations on the use of these parameters and
also to comment on the other two as they are relevant to much of what is
          The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication               233

discussed in this volume, but they do not receive detailed consideration
below5.
   The frequency of occurrence of the different bones greatly assists in the
identification of the type of site involved (e.g. a field butchering camp) and
the recognition of “trade”. The value of this technique for the investigation
of hunting practices is shown by the work on North American palaeo-Indian
sites6. This has also been used in the study of a Saxon farm site in London7
where it showed that the most valuable joints of mutton had disappeared
from the site. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 and relevant details are given below8.




Fig 1 The minimum number of animals identified from the principal bones
     of the body of the sheep found on a Saxon site, Whitehall, London.
     (This sketch, by Mr. John Atkinson, approximates the type of female sheep from the site)



   Although this method is useful for understanding hunting practices and for
illustrating marketing or the disposal of meat, it does not provide a basis for
the recognition of domestication. The size of the animal will normally deter¬
mine whether it is butchered on the spot instead of the whole carcase being
brought back to the dwelling site intact. Even where there is a temporal shift
in the bone frequency spectrum from field dressing to site dressing, this
may mean no more than a change in hunting area, technique or cultural
practices.
   The minimum number of animals is now the generally accepted basis for all
quantity studies, it having been amply demonstrated on many occasions how
misleading are the results of studies using the fragments method.
   The minimum number of animals may either be used alone or as a basis for
further calculation depending on what aspects of species “importance” are
being studied. Archaeologists commonly refer to the importance of a species
without specifying what the animals were important for. Some common
234   Part H Domestication and exploitation of animals       chaplin

measures of importance, meaningful in the archaeological context are the
number of animals in relation to accommodation, fodder, mobility, etc., the
amount of food produced (not only meat, but milk, blood, visceral organs,
etc.9) and the provision of raw materials. The quantities involved are obtained
by extrapolation from the minimum number, taking into account the age, sex
and size of the animals involved. We should remember that in the most
simple terms at least a hundred sheep may only be the body weight food
equivalent of ten bovines. In terms of resources (food + raw material +
work) one species may be of overwhelming importance though its numbers
are few. In other cases an animal that contributes little in terms of total food
may be of critical importance in the overall food strategy, by providing a food
resource at the most critical period. A likely animal in this respect is the pig.

We should not forget the very important permissive role of certain species.
The capacity of animals to replace human effort or to permit innovation is of
tremendous importance in changing the subsistence and commercial strategy
of man. The effect of the horse on the Indian hunters of the Great Plains of
the U.S.A. is one example of this. More important to our discussion of
agricultural evolution is the contribution of the bovine as a work animal in
both tillage and transport. The bovine harnessed to the plough permitted a
much greater area to be cultivated without population increase which would
have cancelled the benefits of extended tillage. It thus permitted the expan¬
sion of arable cultivation and the marketing of the increased production over a
much wider area. The existence of a marketable surplus was thus able to
nurture the development of non-subsistence economies. The occurrence of
domesticated bovines has a far greater significance than just a shift from
hunting to keeping. We should bear in mind the exceptional importance of
this enabling factor even if, through lack of evidence of its action, we cannot
prove and quantify it in the same way as we do the basic animal production.
   In many human groups when we think of the animals we must consider
that food may have been the predominant need supplied by them. In such
cases it is clearly useless to talk in terms of importance by reference to the
number of head walking around. What is important is the total contribution
of this species to the diet. Again, in relation to agriculture, it is misleading to
talk in terms of shifts in species importance without reference to the exploita¬
tion being practised. If, for example, there is a numerical increase of sheep
whilst cattie numbers stay static, this may have arisen as a result of the
inception or extension of wool production rather than as a result of the
extension of overall meat production. This is more likely to have been
achieved by an extension of cattle numbers if this species could supply it
efficiently within the strategy of production. Here we must bear in mind the
relative difficulties of extending and stabilizing meat production. The small
species with their different breeding biology and development patterns may
be more efficient in producing short term increases and needs, though this
          The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication      235

strategy raises other problems in relation to the suitability of the habitat and
the need for supervision, etc.
    This type of interpretation of the bone evidence is just that—interpre¬
tation—it represents one person’s view of the evidence. Generally it repre¬
sents the best fit to our prejudices. It is therefore disturbing to find a trend in
some recent literature towards the presentation of little more than the
author’s interpretation and lacking the fundamental evidence which would
enable others to assess the data in the light of their theories.
    In a herd of animals, various age and sex structures will optimize the
production of such commodities such as meat, milk, fleece, etc. In the case of
sheep optimum all-commodity production is likely to be achieved by a herd
consisting almost entirely of females and castrates, which are kept until they
are worn out and unlikely to survive another winter. Males, because of their
greater size, yield more meat and wool than a castrate but they may well be
disruptive to the herd. A more efficient use of the herd may however be to
keep only the females for the bulk of the wool (plus breeding, milk and
residual meat) and to remove castrated animals when they reach an economic
carcase weight (having of course also collected the wool clip). Any exploita¬
tion for the basic animal product on a rational basis gives rise to specific age
and sex structures in the population. Population models according to the
basic parameters can be built up for any type of exploitation or survival
strategy. Such models are valuable tools in interpreting the economy behind
the bone assemblage. The exploitation patterns quoted here are the result of
work on Roman and later sites. In quoting them I do not wish to imply that
such patterns will be found on the earliest domestication sites but merely to
demonstrate the strength of these methods in an archaeological context.
   As in the domesticated animals the nature of the parameters for wild
species will be characteristic for particular situations. The population age
structure of a wild herd of deer, for example, is a property of that species and
its habitat, and man’s activity10. Fig. 2 illustrates the age and sex structure of a
wild herd of roe deer in Denmark described by Anderson11, details of which
are given below12. If environmental evidence is available a prediction of this
can be made within certain limits. This will greatly assist in understanding
incipient domestication and the level of exploitation involved. As domestica¬
tion is a movement away from the wild and a transference of both stock and
ideas from one environment to another, the way in which man was exploiting
the wild animals will strongly influence his approach to the problems of
utilization in captivity.
   Man’s exploitation of a wild population is governed by his needs, his
technical skill, his hunting skill and the biology and behaviour of the animal
population.

If we assume, as I think we must, a close knowledge of the territory and
species therein, it is probable that hunting skill is largely static. In the absence
236   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CHAPLIN




Fig 2 The age and sex structure of a herd of wild roe deer (Capreolus
      capreolus L) at Kalo, Denmark, based on the extermination of the herd.



of evidence for the introduction of superior weapons we may reasonably
assume that this factor is also constant. In any case, improved weapons, etc.,
mostly affect the quantity and more rarely the nature of what is killed.
   Thus our two major variables are man’s needs (modified by religious needs
where necessary) and the biology of the animal population. We are thus able
to construct models of animal populations to show which animals are likely to
be killed and to formulate certain hypotheses which will assist in assessing the
exploitation.
   Any sample of bones derived from a human occupation site does of course
reflect some degree of human need. Certain needs and their consequences
are however of particular relevance to domestication.
   The amount of time and effort needed to capture an animal is not propor¬
tional to its size; thus in the quest for food man tends to exert a choice for the
          The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication   237

largest ungulates available that are consistent with his needs, abilities and
efforts. Depending on relative abundance however the same quantity of meat
may be more easily obtained from several animals of a smaller species.
Further, some species can survive much higher cropping rates than others.
Animals with long pre-pubertal periods such as the elephants contrast sharply
with the medium sized ungulates in this respect. Given hunting aids such as
dogs, the emphasis in hunting may be shifted to those species that are
amenable to herding by dogs such as reindeer, saiga, sheep and goats, etc.,
away from cattle, pigs and deer, which are not so amenable to hunting in this
way. A desire for a particular raw material such as wool or antler may also
influence hunting and it would be of value to know the extent to which this
affected the ecology of the region. Preferential culling of male animals in a
polygamous species such as red deer or sheep is beneficial to the population
since it increases the reproduction rate13, a fact which would not go un¬
noticed. Thus, whether deliberate or not (a fact which we can never know)
such a beneficial exploitation should perhaps be regarded as incipient
domestication. Such patterns are identifiable in bone samples by reference to
the parameters given.
   If selective hunting is not practised the cull should be random in regard to
the numbers of animals in any age and sex group. We may therefore predict
for a given species the likely proportions of each age and sex group when no
selection is practised. Adjustment must be made for differences in behaviour
and biology between the sexes. From the sort of data that is given in Fig. 2 it
is possible to estimate the frequency with which a sex or age group is likely to
be encountered. This can then be modified in the fight of behaviour patterns
such as that of the red deer herd which is usually led by an old hind.
Being the leader, the old hind is the one most likely to be caught by capture
devices set on lines of movement.
   In some cervids a selection bias for anders may be recognized by com¬
parison of the age structure of the males with that of the females. Since the
female shows no obvious external indication of her age the female sample
should reflect the random picture. The age structure of a sample of male
fallow deer killed in road accidents in Epping Forest14, is shown in Fig. 3
this may be compared with the age structure of a sample of male fallow deer
obtained by purposeful culling in a park herd shown in Fig. 4. These patterns
require detailed study of the individuals and populations in order to explain
them. The park herd is only explicable in terms of the purpose of the cull and
the ability of the stalker to identify the relevant criteria in living animals15.
   Careful consideration must be given to the age structure and seasonal
distribution of the males and female16. In polygamous species this can vary
considerably between the sexes. The mortality rate often varies considerably
and this is not so much occasioned by the direct effects of fighting males but
the aftermath. During the rutting season males lose condition as a result of
 which many fail to survive the spring. In some species there is a marked
238   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   CHAPLIN




                                                          paillH jaquinN




                                                                                1
                                                                                S       “
                                                                                        <u
                                                                                Q       *->
                                                                                        o
                                                                                 a a>
                                                                                 w .3
                                                                                ^ a,
                                                                                 j> O-t
                                                                                 I w
                                                                                rG c
                                                                                m-i     un

                                                                                 <U     £
                                                                                T3 J
                                                                                 3 ^
                                                                                -a 05
                                                                                F-H
                                                                                    y

                                                                                 o e
                                                                                 U      c3
                                                                                 bo
                                                                                 a3    -t-j

                                                                                 (U     <L>
                                                                                .G GG
                                                                           QJ
                                                                           CD   H 3
                                                                           c
                                                                                .b-0
                                                  pan.ivj jaqiunN               s;
         The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication    239

seasonal separation of the sexes for much of the year. It must be borne in
mind however that often the young (pre-pubertal) males form part of the
female herd17.
    In conclusion we can say that in assessing the nature of the exploitation of
a wild species by man the most important parameters are the age and sex of
the animals in the sample, the structure of which must be explained against
the biology and behaviour of the species.
    Despite exerting a fairly strong influence on the wildlife population
prehistoric man is unlikely to have created any strong imbalance or brought
many species near extinction. However, where man had concentrated on a
particular species, either as a result of environmental or ecological factors or
the use of canids for hunting, some form of wildlife management (incipient
domestication) was being exerted. In the case of animals like the reindeer it
is an almost invisible step to full domestication.
    It is not known whether sedentary domestication was generally preceded
by a phase of semi-nomadic domestication. We must be careful not to over¬
 generalize about such events for the history of domestication of each species
 was probably different amongst different groups and in different environ¬
 ments. It is possible that semi-nomadic domestication is the result of the
 evolution of hunting techniques with specialization as a result of the adoption
 of the dog. We may on this basis suggest why man was able, in certain areas,
 to have reached a stage of semi-nomadic/nomadic herding of reindeer, sheep
 and goats, and possibly gazelles. This is however a blind alley of cultural
 evolution and there is as yet little evidence that this is a significant general
 stage of the transition from hunting to domestication.
     An alternative view of the domestication of the sheep and goat lies in their
 relationship to cultivation. The full potential of tillage to the community is
 only realized when this is sedentary though it does not preclude seasonal
 hunting (which can be identified from the bones). The effect of tillage is to
 insert into the environment patches of concentrated luxuriance which few
 herbivores can resist. Thus, with the adoption of tillage the species valued for
 hunting become the enemies of the cultivator. The necessity of crop pro¬
  tection, however, must have been a welcome innovation for the animals came
  into the fields and no longer had to be pursued! To be a successful cultivator
  however one had to virtually exterminate the game, and meat and raw
  materials would become scarce locally. It is perhaps at this stage that the most
  valuable species were brought into captivity. Some support for this view is
  obtained by a consideration of which species were the most usable and which
  were actually chosen in this early period.
     In South-west Asia there would seem to be three contenders—pigs, goats
  and sheep. The pig would seem to be the least amenable of the three because
  of its weak social structure. Sheep and goats are relatively small and can be
  handled by one man, they breed regularly and have a short generation period.
  These qualities are also shared by the pig. Sheep and goat are social species,
240   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CHAPLIN


handleable with the aid of canids, this contrasts with the remainder of the
fauna—cattle, pigs, deer, etc., where this is more weakly developed.
   The herding of reindeer in the north is a logical extension of their hunting
in a zone which does not favour tillage and to which domestic species are ill
adapted. In other geographical zones away from South-west Asia, other
species might have been more attractive. The choice however may not always
have had to be made since in Europe, by the time tillage had spread to any
extent, it was already accompanied by successfully domesticated ungulates,
both large and small. It thus appears that in Europe and South-west Asia it is
just those animals that we would expect to be most suitable that are the earliest
domesticated ungulates on present evidence. We do, however, need to know
much more about animal exploitation and its relationship to settlement and
cultivation in pre-domestication times by methods outiined above.
    The hypothesis involving tillage implies that full domestication is an
immediate step and that from the outset man must exert his control by
containment and in ensuring that food is available and that the environment
will enable them to breed and flourish. Inherent in this new relationship are
two potentially disruptive factors, one, the problem of the sex ratio of the
offspring and the disruptive effect of sexually mature males, the second, the
need for a take-off from the population for food. There are two ways of
dealing with the problem of the male. Either the removal of the majority of
males before puberty or their castration. The optimum production from the
herd is obtained by the latter method though there is possibly little difference
between killing intact males when they reach optimum pre-pubertal con¬
dition and the killing of castrates when they reach optimum condition. The
overall management of the herd for meat and fleece production in the case of
sheep consists of the keeping of the females into old age which are killed
when they are unlikely to survive the lean period. This provides annual crops
of wool and lambs, and also residual meat. The males, either as castrates or
intact animals are killed for meat as described above since they are of less
value than females and reach optimum value at a particular weight and time.
 We must, I think, give credit to these early farmers/herders for the rational
use of their flock and I think the pattern outlined above is not beyond their
 ability. This type of system is clearly recognizable archaeologically since there
 is a considerable disparity between the components of the relevant para¬
 meters between the wild and domesticated systems of exploitation. These
 utilization patterns are well demonstrated at the Saxon farm in Whitehall,
 London. Provisional age structure data of unsexed bones is shown in Figs.
 5-7 for cattle, pigs and sheep. Despite the slight inconsistencies18 in the data
 occasioned by the methods used, clear differences in the strategy are apparent
 between the species. These differences are readily explained on the lines noted
 above.
    The sex and age structures of this domesticated system are quite distinct.
 The majority of the animals fall into two groups, one, predominantly of male
              The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication   241

     100




     20
■S
C3




           Age range




Fig 5 Saxon farm, Whitehall, London. Age at death of domestic pigs as
           shown by the fusion of the epiphyses of long bones. Above, percentage
           of animals aged less than x months. Below, percentage killed in age
           range.

and castrates, are killed quite young, and another group, predominantly of
females, are killed in old age. One of the critical points to be noted is that a
trimodal sex structure will be present but it must be remembered that the
intact male is likely to be represented only by about two to four animals per
hundred. Adequate samples are therefore large. Limits to the recognition of
sex are set by bones whose growth is not yet completed. These immature
bones have not as far as I am aware been investigated for sexual differences.
   There are enormous difficulties surrounding any attempt to age animals
242         Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals   chaplin




      80-




v>
O)
-20H
a>
cn
co



                   18 months
            Age range -months
     100'




     40


     ,20-


                   0-18 months
            Age range-months


Fig 6 Saxon farm, Whitehall, London. Age at death of domestic cattle as
            shown by the fusion of the epiphyses of long bones. Above, percentage
            of animals aged less than x months. Below, percentage killed in age
            range.


absolutely. This however does not invalidate the method since we are only
concerned with the relative age and sex structure of the population and this
can be obtained from either dental criteria19 or the use of the sequence of
fusion of the epiphyses of long bones20. Depicted graphically this latter is
shown as the number above or below the age. Much work has now been done
on sexual dimorphism in bones and it should not be difficult to interpret the
distribution patterns of measurements and ratios obtained from the sample.
   It has been seen that the exploitation of domestic and of wild populations
is characterized by particular features of the age and sex classes within the
population which are sufficiently different to be detectable in groups of sub¬
fossil bone. Further parameters given above enable both a description and a
         The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication   243

         100




        s 20




                   Age range-months
            100



            80-




            40 -


        ^20-1




                   Age range - months


Fig 7 Saxon farm, Whitehall, London. Age at death of domestic sheep as
     shown by the fusion of the epiphyses of the long bones. Above, per¬
     centage of animals aged less than * months. Below, percentage killed in
     age range.


quantification of the exploitation of animals by man to be made. It is suggested
that this approach is particularly necessary when seeking to study the man/
animal relationship and therefore also to the study of the origins and history
of domestication in particular.
244   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals          CHAPLIN



      Notes
       1 Kurten, B. (1959). Rates of Evolution in Fossil Mammals. Cold Spring
         Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. 24; Genetics and Twentieth
         Century Darwinism, 205.
       2 Chaplin, R. E. (1965). Animals in Archaeology, Antiquity, 39, p. 204;
         Berry, R. J., this volume, p. 207-17.
       3 Chaplin, R. E. (1966). Reproduction in British Deer. Passmore Edwards
         Museum, London.
       4 It is perhaps worth bearing in mind at this stage that the biological
         definition of domestication that is generally accepted and which is used
         in this book does not provide a single criteria for its objective recognition
         on archaeological sites until a very late period.
       5 I am preparing a fuller study on the recording and use of such parameters.
       6 White, T. E. (1952-5). Observations on the butchering technique of some
         aboriginal peoples. 1952—American Antiquity, 17, p. 337. 1953—
         American Antiquity, 19, p. 160. 1954—American Antiquity, 194, p. 254.
         1955—American Antiquity, 21, p. 170. White, T. E. (1953). Studying
         osteological material. Plains Archaeological Conference Newsletter, 6,1953;
         Guilday, J., Parmalee, P. and Tanner, D. (1962). Aboriginal butchering
         techniques at the Eschelman site (36 La 12), Lancaster County, Penn¬
         sylvania, Pennsylvania Archaeologist, 32, 2: p. 59.
       7 Chaplin, R. E. in preparation. The animal bones from a Saxon farm in
         Whitehall, London. A collection of animal bones from pits of the ninth
         century a.d. is being studied.
       8 The discrepancy between the number of animals identified from bones
         that would have had little meat on them and those that had the most is inter¬
         preted as indicating the “export” of dressed carcases or joints from this
         site. This analysis for practical reasons is limited to cranial, girdle and
         limb bones.
       9 Cranstone, B. A. L., this volume, p. 247-63.
      10 Lack, D. (1954). The Natural regulation of Animal Numbers. Oxford.
      11 Anderson, J. (1953). Analysis of a Danish roe-deer population. Danish
         Rev. of Game Biology, 2, p. 127.
      12 The data redrawn from Anderson, J. (1953). ibid, is based on the total
         extermination of a wild herd of Roe deer. A great deal of very important
         information is contained in this paper which should be consulted in full.
         The data given here should not be used without reference to the original
         work.
      13 Anderson, J. (1953). ibid.
      14 Chaplin, R. and Chapman, D. (1963). A preliminary report on some fallow
         deer (Dama dama) from Epping Forest, Essex Naturalist, 31 (1), p. 148;
         Chaplin, R. and Chapman, D. (1966). Report on fallow deer (Dama dama L)
         obtained from Epping Forest during May-December 1964, J. of Zoology,
         148, p. 561.
      15 Chaplin, R., and White, R. (1969). The use of tooth eruption and wear,
         body weight and antler characteristics in the age estimation of wild and
         park male fallow deer (Dama dama),J. of Zoology, 157, p. 125.
      16 Grubb, P. and Jewell, P. A. (1966). Social grouping and home range in feral
         soay sheep, in Jewell, P. A. and Loizos, C. (eds.) Play, Exploration and Terri¬
         tory in Mammals, Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, Number
         18, London; Lowe, V. P. W. (1966). Observation on the dispersal of red
         deer on Rhum, in Jewell, P. A. and Loizos, C. ibid.; Darling, F. Fraser
         (I937)* A Herd of Red Deer, Oxford.
      17 Grubb, P. and Jewell, P. A. (1966). ibid.
    The use of non-morphological criteria for studying domestication       245

18 In detail almost any of this type of graph can be misleading because of the
   present limits of our knowledge and techniques for age estimation. The
   present graphs Figs. 5-7 are based on the fusion of the epiphyses of the
   long bones. The data depicted here is based on the percentage of a particu¬
   lar bone type that is or is not fused. The sequence in which the epiphyses
   fuse is generally accepted as a constant but the true age at which they fuse
   is extremely variable. This is discussed more fully in Chaplin, in prepara¬
   tion and Silver, I. (1963). The ageing of domestic animals, in Brothwell,
   D. R. and Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London. The ages
   given on the lower axis of the graph are in general the upper limits of the
   range of variation in modern stock quoted by Silver, I. (1963). ibid. In
   Fig. 6 no attempt has been made to remove the minor inconsistencies in
   the centre. This is due to the fairly small sample of relevant criteria in
   that range. Notwithstanding these cautions these graphs give a reliable
   indication of the general structure of the husbandry on this site.
19 Chaplin, R. E., in preparation; Chaplin, R. and White, R. (1969). ibid.
20 Silver, I. (1963). ibid.
      B. A. L. CRANSTONE

      Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography


I must begin by defining my brief. My main concern is with the types of
economies in which livestock play a part; with the connection (sometimes the
contradiction) between the economic value of an animal and the prestige
which it enjoys or confers; with the efficiency (or lack of it) with which the
economic possibilities of animals are exploited; with the techniques used by
man in handling animals and in obtaining from them what he desires. I am
dealing mainly with animals as providers of food or raw materials, not with
draught or pack animals, or with animals as sources of power. I shall hardly
enter the very wide fields of the effects of stock-keeping on social and political
institutions and on the way of life of peoples who depend largely on their
livestock, or of the restrictive effect this way of life may have on their material
culture.



       The place of animals in some representative societies

Most people who practise some form of agriculture keep domestic animals
which provide food, raw materials, or power: that is to say, which are not
merely pets, or aids in hunting, but are valued for their meat, milk, blood,
hides, wool or other products, or for their ability to pull or carry. Among
peoples who practise shifting cultivation and who lack the plough the number
of animals kept and their economic importance tend to be relatively small, for
the level of agricultural technique is not sufficiently high to produce a surplus
of food to support them. It is true that the animals often forage for themselves,
as in the case of the mithan2 of Assam or the Melanesian pig, but they usually
return at night or at least at intervals to be fed. In these conditions domestic
and wild or feral animals often inter-breed, and in appearance may be in¬
distinguishable. Indeed the Nagas of Assam encourage this interbreeding to
improve the stock, and supply salt-licks in the forest in order to attract the
wild bulls, the domesticated females being driven out to them3. Since few
animals can be kept there is little or no deliberate use of manure on the fields.
248   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


though cattle may graze on stubbles after harvest. Many peoples at this
agricultural level do not understand the value of manure.
  Among plough cultivators the situation is rather different. The use of the
plough implies the use of draught animals. Among plough cultivators grain
crops are usually the staple, which means that there are stubbles, or straw, or
by-products on which cattle can be fed, and improved techniques may
provide a surplus to human requirements which can be fed to animals.
Animals tend to be kept under closer control, because the land suitable for
cultivation is likely to be fully and permanently utilized, and so there is less
scope for animals to forage and more need to ensure that they do not damage
crops, fences or terraces. Under these conditions of closer confinement
opportunities for interbreeding with wild animals will be much less frequent.
Moreover the greater density of settlement may result in wild animals of the
same species being exterminated in the locality. It then becomes more likely
that selective breeding will take place4.
  The animals which provide manure may not be in the same ownership as
the stubbles on which they feed. The cattle-keeping Fulani of the savannah
zone between the southern borders of the Sahara and the forest provide an
example of a symbiotic relationship with the settled agriculturalists. They
migrate southwards in the dry season in search of pasture and water, and
northwards in the wet season to avoid tsetse fly. Except on the edge of the
desert they depend largely on the sedentary peoples, pasturing their cattle
on the stubbles or corraling them on the fallows, making gifts to the culti¬
vators before entering their territory, and obtaining vegetable foods in
exchange for milk products5.
  Animals are often of great importance to settled agricultural peoples not
only for draught purposes but also to provide power for water-raising or
milling machinery. But their direct contribution to the food supply may be
rather small, though important in a protein-deficient diet.
  Many shifting cultivators value their domestic animals as much for ritual
as for purely economic reasons. This is true of the Nagas of Assam and their
mithan6, and in many parts of Melanesia pigs are regarded in this light: some
tribes of the New Guinea highlands kill hundreds at periodical ceremonies.
  The New Hebrides provide some good examples. Layard7 describes the
role of pigs in Vao, a small island off the east coast of Malekula. The upper
canines of boars are knocked out so that the tusks of the lower jaw grow round
in a circle, pierce the flesh of the cheek and re-enter the jaw. In some cases
they re-emerge to form a second complete circle or even more. It is not
surprising that the physical condition of these boars is usually poor.
“Circle-tuskers” are essential for sacrifice and ceremonial presentation. The
only pig-meat eaten is that of sacrifices. So some boars are gelded and
sacrificed before the tusks re-enter the jaw; their value is much less, but they
provide more meat. For this reason pigs are often killed in pairs, a circle-
tusker and a gelding. The circle-tusker is of value only while alive, and only if
                        Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       249

its tusks are in good condition; if a tusk is broken the pig is worth little. Its
physical condition does not affect its value, but after death its tusks are
worthless.
   It often happens that a man does not possess suitably tusked boars when
he requires them, and it is necessary to borrow. The boar must be repaid
later with a boar with tusks of the stage of development which those of the
borrowed boar would by then have reached. This may entail borrowing again.
Tusked boars thus become almost a form of currency, and a complex network
of obligation comes into being. It appears too that the importance of pigs is
such that land which might be used for cultivation is left to provide foraging
ground for them.
   Sows are not eaten by either sex. Women may not, because pigs are killed
only in the context of ritual in which women have no part. Men may not,
because sows being female are ritually dangerous to them. Layard says of the
cultivation of tusks: “This practice lies at the base of the natives’ whole overt
religious life, gives rise to the chief form of currency, and so largely regulates
all their economic activities, and . . . permeates every aspect of life”8.
   The Sakau district of north-west Espiritu Santo, as described by J. R.
• Baker9, presents a somewhat different picture. Here there is the remarkably
high proportion of about ten to twenty hermaphrodite pigs per hundred
males. The degree, or form, of their intersexuality varies. Four forms are
distinguished and named. All are sterile, but grow tusks. Apparently the
natives have to operate on piglets of one form to allow them to pass urine—an
interesting example of veterinary technique. A man purchasing promotion in
rank (on which political and social power depend) must kill both tusked boars
and hermaphrodites, and they are required also for presentation, for example
in obtaining a wife. As in Vao pigs are borrowed. Since boars and hermaphro¬
dites only are of value many female piglets are killed instead of being kept for
breeding, as would seem logical to us. Here women and children may eat the
flesh of hermaphrodites.
   Among pastoral peoples the picture is somewhat different. Full pastoral
nomadism is an Old World way of life practised in areas in which either
insufficient rainfall or a short summer growing season makes agriculture
impossible or unattractive. Pastoral nomads are economically dependent on
their animals, and they cannot, therefore, totally ignore economic considera¬
tions in relation to them. This dependence forces them, or a section of the
group, to lead a nomadic life in search of pasture and water, but it is not
always necessary for the whole group to move. Among the Lapps the old
people, women and children live relatively settled lives while the younger
 men tend the herds (this is to some extent a recent development), and the
 camels of the Ahaggar Tuareg may be at pasture in the Sudan five hundred
 miles from the oases where the flocks of goats and sheep are based and the
 slaves tend the gardens10.
    The animal which has the greatest economic value for a pastoral people is
250   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


often not that which has the greatest prestige. The Tuareg keep camels,
goats and sheep, a few horses, and in the south a few cattle and donkeys. The
camel is the prestige animal, a subject (with war and love) for poetry. Formerly
the Tuareg lived partly by raiding and by exactions from caravans, and for
these activities camels were essential, as they still are for trading activities.
But economically goats are much more valuable. There are ten times as many
goats as sheep, the latter being bred mainly for slaughter, and regarded as
more appropriate for sacrifice by this rather superficially Moslem people.
There seem to be about thirty to forty goats per person (perhaps excluding
slaves).
   The Rwala bedouin of the Syrian desert11 keep camels and horses. Here it is
the camel which is economically vital, but the horse which has the prestige.
Horses are used for repelling raids, in the vicinity of the camp; but camels
are ridden for long-distance raiding. Few stallions are kept, mares being
preferred for riding. The horse is unsuited to desert conditions; it has to be
specially fed, and foals receive all the mare’s milk and camel’s milk in addition.
The bedouin are the suppliers of camels to the settled peoples, and the camel
is practically their only saleable product.
   On the steppes of Russian Turkestan the Kazak12 kept horses, sheep, a few
goats, and bactrian camels (their traditional way of life is now largely if not
entirely obsolete). Sheep, of the fat-rumped and fat-tailed breeds, form the
majority of the livestock and provide the main food supply, but the Kazak too
value the horse more highly. However, unlike the Arabs, the Kazak prefer to
ride geldings. Mares are milked, and their flesh is eaten, but both are luxury
foods. Sheep too are milked, and the milk made into butter and cheese. The
climate is unsuitable for cattle, but a few are kept for their milk: beef is
disliked and rarely eaten. Sheep and horses are herded separately, since
horses need better grazing. Sheep provide wool, which is made into felt.
Camels are mainly used as pack animals, but the hair which they shed in the
spring is used in weaving rugs and hangings for the felt-covered tents called
yurt. Sheep are herded by boys, who often ride oxen.
   Among the East African herding peoples it is cattle which have, and confer,
prestige. The Masai13—who are exceptional for this area in that they do not
also cultivate—have nearly as many sheep as cattle, but sheep are far less
highly esteemed. Both sheep and catde provide milk, blood and meat. How¬
ever, the Masai have two types of cattle: a smaller sort with horns of lyre
form, and a larger type with shorter horns. The latter yield nearly twice as
much milk, but the former are more highly valued. Among East African cattle¬
keeping people generally a man’s prestige depends on the size of his herd, not
on the quality of his beasts.
  The Nuer11 of the swamp and savannah country on both sides of the upper
Nile both cultivate and herd cattle. They are pastoral in oudook, and before
the outbreak of rinderpest in the late nineteenth century apparendy relied
more heavily on their catde than they do now. In 1930 there were about ten
                        Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography      251

cattle and five sheep and goats to a byre—that is, to a family unit. Millet and
maize are cultivated, and fishing is important in the dry season and in bad
years. Among the Nuer cattle have undisputed ritual pre-eminence. They play
a part in all social processes and relationships. Fathers provide cows to obtain
wives for their sons, and another son cannot marry until the herd has been
built up again. Men have an intimate knowledge of the peculiarities of their
beasts, and take their names from the ox given by their father at their initia¬
tion. Songs are sung in praise of oxen and girls. Cattle, sheep and goats are
never killed purely for meat; they are sacrificed as a means of making contact
with the spirits. But the pretext may be a thin one, and any animal which dies
goes into the pot, so meat is eaten more commonly than by many herding
peoples.
   An indication of the real importance of a domestic animal can be gained
from the number of specialized terms relating to it. The Tuareg have twelve
or more terms to indicate the age and sex of goats and at least seventeen for
their colour15. The Nuer have six main terms for the shape of the horns of
their cattle; ten main colour terms and at least twelve for combinations of
white and grey; and others denoting age and sex16. The Lapp reindeer herders
—who have no other domestic animal of economic significance—have about
fifty names for colours and the distribution of patches of colour, almost as
many for varieties of antler form, and dozens for age and sex. This has a very
practical application: by using a combination of these terms it is possible to
designate any individual animal among thousands17.



      Variation of efficiency in the exploitation of livestock
The degree of efficiency with which peoples exploit the possibilities offered
by their livestock varies greatly. The Nuer seem to be markedly successful in
this respect. Their staple foods are milk and millet. Cows’ milk is drunk
fresh or eaten with millet porridge. It is also left to sour in gourds, which are
not cleaned so that the acids remain to curdle the milk. It is accumulated,
sometimes for several weeks (in which case ox’s urine is added as a pre¬
servative), and then is boiled to make a yellow cheese which will keep for
months if sealed in a gourd with cattle-dung. The whey is drunk by women
and boys. The milk of sheep and goats is used only by children.
   Blood is obtained from cattle by binding the neck so that a vein becomes
congested, and piercing it with a small knife. Women boil the blood to
thicken it; men let it coagulate and roast pieces in the embers.
   The Nuer depend on their cattle not only for food. Their country lacks
timber, stone and iron. Cattle provide skins, from which bedding, drums,
shields and thongs are made; bones, made into beaters, pounders, scrapers
and other tools; horn from which spoons and spear heads are formed; dung,
used as fuel, for plastering walls and floors, for dressing wounds; the ashes of
252   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


dung are used as a mouth-wash and tooth powder and for dressing the hair
and skin; urine has uses in washing, making cheese and dressing skins.
  The Masai use milk and blood, and make butter but not cheese. They also
use the milk, blood and meat of sheep. Blood is obtained by shooting into
the vein of the neck a special arrow with a stop below the point which pre¬
vents it penetrating too far (Fig. i). There are restrictions on eating meat: it




Fig i Drawing blood from the neck vein of an ox by shooting into it an
      arrow with a stop below the point. Masai.
      (after Hollis, A. C. (1905). The Masai: their language and folklore. Oxford.
      PI. XI.)

must not, for instance, be eaten on a day on which milk is consumed. The
Bantu-speaking peoples of south-east and south Africa do not draw blood, nor
do they make cheese. The Fulani depend heavily on milk, do not use blood,
and eat meat only on ceremonial occasions.
  The Rwala bedouin depend mainly on camel’s milk drunk fresh or sour, or
boiled and made into cheese. Many families when in the desert live solely on
milk for long periods. Meat is rarely eaten. Wheat or sorghum and dates
are obtained from the settled peoples on the desert fringes. Among the
Tuareg only the camel herdsmen depend substantially on camel’s milk. They
make no cheese and little butter. Those living in the oases, however—the
majority—consume a good deal of goat’s milk, which is drunk fresh or sour
and made into butter or hard cheese, the latter being pounded and mixed with
food or water. Little meat is eaten: occasionally a camel foal is killed for a
festival, and barren she-goats or castrated he-goats are killed. Sheep are
bred mainly for slaughter, but are few in number. Millet, dates and figs and
other vegetable foods are available in the oases, and herdsmen sometimes
collect and grind wild grass seeds.
   The Kazak keep mares mainly for their milk, which is made into kumiss.
                        Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       253


  It is poured into a skin bag, a wood paddle is inserted and the neck is closed
  tightly round it. The paddle is agitated for several hours and then the milk is
  left to sour for about four days. The result is a slightly intoxicating and very
  nourishing drink which keeps for a long time. The bags have been known to
  burst, with devastating results. Sheep’s milk, which is much more plentiful, is
  soured or made into butter or cheese. Soft cheese is mashed in water when
  milk is scarce; hard cheese largely replaces meat in winter and spring. The
  older sheep are killed off in the autumn, but at other times meat is a
  luxury.
     Most of the Lapps now regard reindeer as a cash crop, selling the meat
  in the urban markets. The herds are allowed to wander in spring and summer
  and become mixed, and little use is made of their milk. Formerly the method
  was more intensive: the herd was kept separate and under control, and does
  were milked from spring to autumn. This method, though it exploited the
  potentialities of the reindeer more fully, was in some ways less efficient; it
  led to overcropping of the lichens in the more restricted area available to a
  family’s herd, and the spread of disease was more rapid. Moreover it re¬
  quired the co-operation of the whole family, which is no longer possible for
. social reasons.
     It will be clear, then, that pastoral peoples vary greatly in the degree to
  which they exploit their animals. Few are able to eat meat regularly. Most
  depend heavily on milk and milk products. All obtain some vegetable food.
  The peoples mentioned also vary greatly in the bases of their economies. The
  Rwala and the Lapps depend almost entirely on camels and reindeer re¬
  spectively. The Kazak and the Tuareg have several species. The Nuer,
  though they think of themselves as cattle people, also cultivate and fish.
  Sections of many pastoral peoples—often those who have lost their herds
  through disease or other misfortune—live settled lives and trade vegetable
  products with their nomadic relatives.
     The reindeer, the last animal of major economic importance to be domesti¬
  cated, provides examples of varying degrees of domestication18. It is used in
  various ways from Scandinavia to the Bering Strait. In the east of Siberia
  and in America the Yukaghir and the Eskimo did not domesticate it, though
  some depended heavily on the wild herds. The half-wild reindeer of the
  Chukchi roam at will, followed by the herders. They cannot be milked or used
  for riding or for drawing sledges; they provide only meat and skins, and the
  Chukchi depend also on fishing and sealing. The sedentary Yakut and the
  Samoyed use them as pack animals and to draw sledges, but not for milking or
  riding. The Tungus live by a combination of hunting and pastoralism. They
  use reindeer for drawing sledges, as pack animals and for riding (a good buck
  will carry 150 lb. for fifty miles in a day). They milk them, but do not make
  butter or cheese. They rarely kill them for meat. Families with only a few
  reindeer use them to extend the range of their hunting and fishing. The
  Skolt Lapps of Norway and Finland have small herds which they manage by
254   Part H Domestication and exploitation of animals      Cranstone


the more intensive method described above, and rely also on fishing and
hunting. Finally the extensive methods of the mountain Lapps have enabled
them to extend southwards down the previously uninhabited plateaux of
central Scandinavia.
   So far only Old World peoples have been mentioned, for pastoralism is
exclusively an Old World way of life. In America the only domestic animals
directly of interest in the present context are the two South American
 Camelidae, the llama and the alpaca19. The llama is of great importance in the
Andean zone as a pack animal. It is hardy, tolerant of thirst, and suited to
 high altitudes. A strong male will average fifteen to twenty miles a day for
 many days carrying more than ioo lb. (this is only a little more than a good
 dog will pull, in favourable conditions; but the conditions in which the two
 animals are employed are quite different). The llama also provides meat, wool
 and hides, and its dried dung is important as fuel in the largely treeless zone in
 which it is found. It is not ridden or milked. The armies of the Incas seem to
 have been accompanied by herds of llamas to serve as a mobile meat-supply.
 Llamas were apparendy castrated to obtain more tasty meat and longer wool,
 but it seems uncertain whether this was a pre-Columbian practice.
    The alpaca, a smaller species, is kept mainly for its wool, but also for its
 meat, hides and dung.
    The vicuna, a wild species, provides superlative wool. The reason for the
 failure of the Indians to domesticate it seems to be that before mating it goes
 through an elaborate and protracted courtship ritual, which is inhibited by
 captivity. The llama and alpaca have similar but apparendy less elaborate
 mating behaviour. One wonders whether similar difficulties have prevented
 the domestication of other species.



       Animal-management techniques
 We now come to techniques of animal management. These can be divided
 conveniendy into those concerned with controlling breeding, those concerned
 with obtaining milk for human use, and a miscellaneous group.
   There are several reasons for not allowing animals to breed freely and
 promiscuously. In harsh environments young born at certain seasons may
 have a reduced prospect of survival. The Kazak fit leather aprons to their
 rams in the spring, since autumn-born lambs have litde chance. The Masai
 practise the same method. The Tuareg divide their flocks of goats into two
 and arrange for the kids to be bom at two seasons, depending on the expected
 availability of pasture, so as to spread the milk yield over a longer period.
 The prepuces of he-goats and rams which are not to be allowed to breed are
 bound with a cord (Fig. 2)20.
    It seems to be rather unusual for males to be selected for breeding in order
 to pass on valuable characteristics. The Nuer, however, choose bull-calves for
                       Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       255




Fig 2 Prevention of mating. A ram, the prepuce of which has been bound
     with a cord and tied back to its scrotum; its front and back legs have
     been hobbled together with the same object. Tuareg.
     (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg.
     Copenhagen. Fig. 25.)

breeding from the calves of the best milking cows and castrate most of the
remainder, leaving one entire to about thirty or forty cows.
   Castration is the most usual method of controlling breeding. It has the
effect, too, of rendering the animals easier to handle and affects their
metabolism. The Lapps castrate most of the reindeer bucks and use them for
draught and pack purposes and as bell-reindeer which lead the herd. The
Tuareg say that castrated camels grow larger humps and fatten more quickly,
and are more enduring and stronger as riding animals. They are also less
dangerous, since bull-camels in rut sometimes attack people.
   The method of castration in general use among cattle-keeping peoples, and
applied to other animals such as camels and horses, is by opening the scrotum
and removing the testicles. Some African herdsmen use a knife, others the
blade of a spear. In New Guinea pigs are castrated in this way with a bamboo
knife. All too often authors (including professional anthropologists) have
recorded the practice without describing the method.
   A second group of methods involves damaging or destroying the testicles
without removing them. Sometimes the scrotum is bound with a cord
beforehand so that the testicles atrophy. The Lapps wrap the scrotum in
cloth and bite or chew it; the result is often a partial castration which however
renders the animal docile and more easily tamed21. The Sonjo of Tanzania
are irrigation agriculturalists who also keep flocks of goats. They castrate all
males at about six months, the only exceptions being those—apparently fairly
numerous—whose testicles do not descend. The method is to strangulate the
scrotum with a bow-string, and then to crush the testicles with an elongated
stone implement especially shaped and smoothed for the purpose22. The
Masai castrate rams by pounding the testicles between two stones.
256   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals     CRANSTONE


   It is unusual to find the ability of females to breed controlled or destroyed.
However, some Tuareg insert a small pebble into the uterus of she-camels
with this object; a practice which seems to be confined to those who prefer
she-camels for riding because of their smoother gait23.
   The development of techniques for obtaining milk is rendered necessary
by the “milk-ejection reflex”. This has been described by Amoroso and
Jewell24; it seems to be a true reflex activated by the release of a hormone.
Stimulating highly-domesticated dairy cattle to “let down their milk” is
less difficult than in the case of the animals usually milked by less advanced
peoples.
   Usually the presence of the young animal is necessary to start the flow
of milk. The Nuer, the Basuto25 and other south African peoples26, and the
Tuareg all allow the calf to suck first; the animal is then milked, after which
the calf is allowed to return to the udder. Difficulty arises if a calf dies, or
is killed for eating or to conserve milk for human use. Many peoples then
skin the calf, stuff the skin with straw or grass and bring it to the mother.
The Nuer rub the dummy with the mother’s urine to give it the “right”
smell. The Rwala sometimes kill a camel calf at birth, smear another with its
blood and bring it to the she-camel; or if a strange calf is to be suckled they
tie up the mother’s nostrils so that she cannot smell it. I have seen a reference
to a method practised in the north of England, where the skin of a dead calf
was mounted on a rocker so that it would butt against the udder in a realistic
manner.




Fig 3 Weaning. A ring armed with thorns which is tied round the calf’s
      muzzle. Nuer.
      (after Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1940). The Nuer. Oxford. Fig. 6.)


  Sometimes the calf is allowed all the mother’s milk for a period after birth.
This may be especially necessary if pasture is poor.
  Another method of activating the milk-ejection reflex is by stimulation of
the genital tract, either manually or by inflating the vagina with air. At the
present time these practices are especially typical (or have been most fre¬
quently recorded) of the cattle-keeping peoples of north-east and east
Africa, but they have been observed in Asia and Europe and are of great
antiquity. They have been described by Lagercrantz27 and by Amoroso and
Jewell.
  In order to conserve milk for human use it may be necessary to accelerate
                         Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography       257




Fig 4 Animal-management techniques of the Gonds of Madhya Pradesh.
      Heavy wood neck-ring, to accustom the beast to a yoke; hobble applied
      to animals given to straying.
      (after MS drawing by Rai Bahadur Hiralal, by permission of the Trustees
      of the British Museum.)



 the weaning process. The young animal may be totally separated from the
 mother or its access may be restricted. The Tuareg keep kids in an enclosure
 or tether them and release them only at certain times to be suckled.
   There are two main groups of devices associated with weaning: those
 which make suckling painful for the mother, and those which make it difficult
or impossible for the young animal. The Nuer tie a ring armed with thorns
round the calf’s muzzle so that it pricks the udder (Fig. 3). The Gonds of
Bihar, about sixty years ago when they were adopting a settled peasant life,
used a device made from four pointed sticks, tied behind the calf’s head
(Fig. 4). An Indian colleague tells me that he has seen this in use by Hindu
peasants, and points out that it prevents not only sucking but also grazing
near ground level. In fact it enforces selective grazing. The Rwala insert a
sharp peg under the nostrils of a camel-calf to prick the udder. The Tuareg
tie the skin of a hedgehog to the muzzle of a kid. They also place a stick
across the mouth, like a bit, and tie it behind the horns (Fig. 5); or pass a stick
through the kid’s cheeks. A stick is passed through the nasal septum of the
calves of cattle (Fig. 6). In the case of camel calves they pierce the upper lip
and pass through it a length of root, which is then knotted at each end. This
makes suckling painful for the mother; but more important (and like the two
latter methods described for kids), it prevents the calf from sucking by
admitting air. The Tuareg also make cuts on the noses of calves, of both
camels and cattle, which make sucking painful for them. These methods, it
258   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    Cranstone




Fig 5 Weaning. A stick tied across the mouth of a kid to prevent sucking.
      Chawiya, Sahara.
      (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Taureg.
      Copenhagen. Fig. 19.)

will be noted, do not affect the ability of the young animal to graze. When the
need for extra milk is temporary both the Tuareg and the Rwala cover the
udder of a she-camel with a pouch or net (Fig. 7). The Lapps smear the
udders of reindeer does with excrement to discourage the fawns.
   Insects are a major pest to most domesticated animals, causing, at best,
loss of milk, and often seriously affecting their condition. The annual migra¬
tions of the Lapps to the plateaux and of the Kazak from the river valleys
where they spend the winter to the open steppes are governed as much by the
need to escape from insects as by the requirements of pasture. The Nuer
confine their cattle at night in byres, all the chinks of which are plugged with
dung. Smoky dung fires are made inside. The cattle are described as emerging
in the morning dazed and staggering. Mosquitoes sometimes cause the
reindeer of the Tungus to stampede. The herder builds a smudge fire round
which the herd congregates by day, grazing by night. The annual south¬
ward migration of the Fulani is in search of pasture and water in the dry
season, but their return northwards in the wet season is enforced by the
tsetse fly. The Bavenda of the north Transvaal keep their cattle in kraals until
the middle of the morning to avoid ticks. Their cattle suffer from flies and




Fig 6 Weaning. A forked stick passed through the nasal septum of a calf,
      to make suckling painful for the cow. Tuareg.
      (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg.
      Copenhagen. Fig. 31.)
                       Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography     259




Fig 7 Goat’s hair net bag which is tied over the udder of a she-camel to
     conserve her milk for human use. Tuareg.
     (after Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg.
     Copenhagen. Fig. 41.)


heat in confinement, but the Bavenda say that the ticks, which are a major
 danger to cattle, go underground as the day gets hotter28.
   There remains a number of miscellaneous techniques and devices which
deserve mention.
   Animals are sometimes hobbled, usually to prevent their wandering too
far while grazing during a halt: a practice, therefore, applied to beasts being
used for riding, pack transport or draught rather than to herds under the care
of a herdsman. The Gonds (and, no doubt, Indian villagers) applied a form
of wooden hobble to cattle which had a habit of wandering from the herd
(Fig. 4). The Tuareg hobble camel calves during weaning so that they
cannot keep up with their mothers when grazing. Many peoples tie the
hind legs of cows during milking with a “spancel”. Hobbles are used on rams
by the Tuareg to prevent or impede breeding.
   The catching of incompletely domesticated or trained animals may
present difficulty. When holding their annual round-ups, at which they sort
their reindeer by their ear-marks, the Lapps drive them into stockades and
lassoo them. The Kazak catch horses from the herds for riding by means of a
noose on the end of a pole, used from horse-back.
   Some African peoples train the horns of their cattle for aesthetic reasons.
The Dinka do this by paring away a portion of the surface so that the horn
grows in the desired curve29; the Nuer make an oblique cut in the horn,
which achieves the same object.
   The practice of identifying animals by ear-marking is widely spread,
being recorded from, for example, the Lapps30, the Sonjo31 and the Tuareg32.
   In New Guinea, where pigs normally forage freely, gardens are often
fenced to keep them out; but even so some pigs become adept at gaining
entry. The peoples at the headwaters of the Sepik apparently blind such pigs
by levering out the eye with a stick, piercing it “to let out the water”, and
allowing it to return to the socket (I have not seen this, but I heard of it
260   Part II Domestication and exploitation of animals    CRANSTONE


from reliable informants). Elsewhere in northern New Guinea these trouble¬
some pigs are discouraged from rooting by having a thin slice cut from the tip
of the snout, which is kept always raw.
   Finally, the method of slaughtering animals is often rigidly prescribed,
especially in contexts of sacrifice, presentation or the acquisition of prestige
or rank. But this would be a subject for a separate contribution.



