Part III: Regional and local evidence for domestication
      F. R. ALLCHIN

      Early domestic animals in India and Pakistan


Considering that the Archaeological Survey of India recently celebrated its
centenary, and that in the past two decades there has been such a spate of
excavations, the available archaeological evidence bearing on the domestica¬
tion of animals in the subcontinent is regrettably sparse (see map, p. 324).
Before 1947 scarcely any excavation reports thought fit to mention animal
remains. The work of Sewell and Guha for Mohenjo-daro (1931)1, and
Prasad for Harappa (1936)2 were happy exceptions. Since 1950 a growing
number of reports has appeared in which at least some reference to animal
remains is made. The principal published data relates to the excavations at
Hastinapur (1950-2)3, Piklihal (1952)4, Maheshwar (1952-3)5, Rangpur
(1953-6)6, Maski (1954)7, Mundigak (1951-8)8, Nevasa (1954-6)9, Utnur
(1957)10,     Langhnaj (1944-63)11. There is further a considerable volume
of hitherto unpublished material relating to other excavations. In some
instances the scale of the excavations, or the quantity of animal remains
discovered, were such that their potential usefulness is limited. Further, some
of the reports provide little more than bare identifications of species, and the
number giving attention to other matters, such as the changes brought about
by domestication, is still very small. One of the upshots of this note is to
point to the need for national centres where animal remains can be preserved
and made available for study. One fears that in the past the field archaeologist
often did not trouble to collect animal remains; but cases have certainly
occurred in which he did so, only to find that they were later disposed of by
the custodian in whose care they were placed. Finally it may well be that
small collections have been retained, but their whereabouts have ceased to be
generally known. My aim in this note is to draw attention to the potential
interest of this subject, and to suggest some of the problems which are ripe for
consideration.
  The first problem must be to discover what animals were utilized at
different periods and what was the history of each species. A second problem
would seem to involve the origin of each domestic species, and whether it was
introduced from outside in an already domesticated condition, or was
locally domesticated from indigenous wild species. A third problem would
318   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    allchin


be to find out what changes, if any, were consequent upon domestication.
And a fourth general problem would concern the utilization of different
species, for food, traction, etc., at various periods.
  For the general history of domestic species in India the data available are
still so slight that there is a serious danger of misinterpreting them. It is
known that the final stage of the stone age, now generally referred to as the
late stone age, persisted in certain refuge areas until very recent times. Proof
has however been lacking that its origin was in absolute time anterior to the
arrival of the first food-producing communities even if this has been generally
accepted as a working hypothesis. Recently a number of excavations of late
stone age caves or rock shelters have been made, and one, at Adamgarh in
Hoshangabad district, has produced a radiocarbon date suggestively earlier
than those of any neolithic sites so far known in India and Pakistan12. Peculiar
interest now centres upon this and other such sites, because among the
animal remains are several species, some of which were potentially domestic.
At Langhnaj these include a canid, a pig (Sus cristatus), buffalo and perhaps
another species of bovine13; and at Adamgarh dog, Bos indicus, buffalo, sheep,
goat, and pig are reported14. It is clearly a matter of great interest to examine
such sites carefully with a view to discovering the sequence in which these
species appear in the sections, and to obtain absolute dates. The publication
of the report on Adamgarh is eagerly awaited. The first appearance of domes¬
tic species in more orthodox “neolithic” contexts is only slightly better known.
It appears that in Baluchistan and adjacent areas bones of cattle, sheep and
goat occur during the first stage of settlement, the stage of semi-permanent
camping sites represented by the lowest levels of Rana Ghundai, Kili Ghul
Mohammad, Mundigak, etc. A single radiocarbon date from Kili Ghul
Mohammad suggests that this period comes to an end around the middle
of the fourth millennium. It is inferred that the cattle were mainly of the
humped zebu variety, as terracotta figurines both during this and subsequent
periods in this area almost always show cattle with a prominent hump. So
far there is very little if any anatomical information about remains from any
of these sites. Chronologically the next earliest information comes from far
to the south at Utnur where a largely pastoral people kept cattle, sheep and
goats during the last quarter of the third millennium B.c. With the civilization
of the Indus plains much more information is available on a whole series of
domestic species. The history of domestication in India and Pakistan is
therefore likely to involve the relationships of two rather separate groups of
peoples, the late stone age hunting and collecting groups, widely scattered
over the whole subcontinent, and perhaps independently taking to domestica¬
tion of certain species; and the groups of largely nomadic pastoralists who
spread from the west, probably as the result of population expansion in the
relatively earlier centres of West Asia. These people, if they brought with
them herds of animals, would have been obvious targets for the “hunting”
activities of the earlier inhabitants whom they encountered15.
                            Early domestic animals in India and Pakistan      319

  My second question relates to the origins of the domestic species attested
in early contexts; briefly these include the zebu, buffalo, sheep, goat, pig,
horse, elephant, camel, dog, cat and fowl. The problem of the origin of Bos
indicus is bound up with that of its relationship to Bos primigenius and is really
quite beyond the scope of this paper16. In India and Pakistan (with the single
exception of the Indus civilization) representations in terracotta and painting,
on either rock or pottery, suggest that the former was the universal type of
cattle. Only in Harappan and pre-Harappan contexts in the Indus valley do
we encounter, alongside the zebu, “unicorn” seals and terracotta figurines of
humpless beasts which resemble the primigenius type, and the formula used to
depict them appears to be of Mesopotamian origin17. Further the study of the
animal remains from Harappa, no less than from Utnur, seems to indicate,
whenever diagnostic characters are available, that they belong to humped
cattle18. It is evident that by the end of the third millennium there were
several breeds of Bos indicus widely dispersed. The breed depicted on the
Harappan seals corresponds remarkably with the modern breed in Sindh
and Gujarat, with its heavy build, pronounced dewlap, and shortish simple
curved horns: that depicted in the oldest stratum of rock paintings and in
neolithic terracottas in the southern Deccan was evidently of much lighter
build, with inconspicuous dewlap and long double curved horns, and with a
pronounced hump, and appears to be closer to the modern cattle of Central
India. There is thus a suggestion that such regional varieties are sufficiently
ancient. These things, together with Alur’s observations on medullosis (to
be referred to below) seem to indicate that Bos indicus was already clearly
differentiated from Bos primigenius, and that its domestication must have
been from an indigenous species.
  The relationship of the Indian buffalo (Bos bubalus) to its wild counterpart
leaves little doubt that it was domesticated locally. To this day the buffalo
is regarded as only semi-domestic, and as Watt so well remarked “Few
domestic animals have in fact changed less than the buffalo”. Cross mating
with wild beasts is still common19. This means that there is little likelihood
of clear differentiation of wild or domestic animals, and that the identification
in archaeological assemblages will have to rely on other criteria. There has
not as yet been sufficient study of sheep and goat bones in our contexts to
indicate the nature of the early specimens, but Prasad concluded that the
Harappan sheep could have been locally domesticated from the feral Ovis
vignei20. The position is no clearer with regard to the goat. Prasad also con¬
cluded that the Harappan pig was a domestic version of the Indian wild pig,
Sus cristatus21. Hence here too it may be difficult to determine whether at any
given site the bones of pig are domestic or feral. I am not aware of any study
of the relationship of the two in modem examples. The bones of horse are
clearly those of an imported animal. It can be agreed with Zeuner that the
teeth obtained by Ross from the surface of the section of Rana Ghundai I
should be regarded with suspicion, and that in any case they are more likely
320   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    allchin

to be those of the onager, Equus hemionus22. The earliest clear evidence comes
from a late level at Mohenjo-daro, and terracotta figurines from Harappan
contexts are at best equivocal. A recent find of horse bones from a site in
Mysore, dated by radiocarbon to c. 1300 b.c. and of equine teeth at a neigh¬
bouring site dated by radiocarbon to c. 1600 b.c.23 is very suggestive; and
need in no way go against the earlier view associating the appearance of the
horse in the subcontinent with the arrival of Indo-Iranian speaking peoples.
There is still no proof that the bones of elephant found in Harappan and
later sites are those of domesticated beasts, and the nature of breeding and
taming makes it unlikely that they would be easily recognizable if they were.
But it can at least be reasonably affirmed that the domestication at whatever
date took place locally. Indeed the elephant seems to call for special glossing
of the definition of the word “domestication”. The remains of camel at
Harappan sites are surely certain proof that the single humped camel was
domestic24. New and more abundant material is understood to be available
in the recent excavations at Kalibangan25. It may be expected that Camelus
dromedarius formerly existed in a feral state in Sindh and Rajasthan, and that
it was locally domesticated. That the jungle fowl was locally domesticated
seems certain, but more study will be required if its history is to be made
clear. So too is there need for more information about the reported remains of
 cat and dog, and their relations to wild species, such as the jackal or wolf.
    My third major problem has to do with changes which may have arisen as
 a result of domestication. As yet insufficient material is available, or insuffi¬
 cient study has been made, to enable such changes to be described. Some work
 has been done for Bos indicus. Thus Sewell proposed that the complexity
 or simplicity of the enamelling patterns of molars from Mohenjo-daro might
 show by reference to modern domestic (or recently feral) herds evidence of
 progressive change26. He also mentioned progressive reduction of size of
 teeth. Later writers have not adduced further evidence in support of his
 views. More recently Alur (in an as yet unpublished study of material from
 Utnur) has noticed a significant variation in the medullosis of certain bones,
 suggesting that by comparison with those of modern cattle they show a
 relatively earlier evolutionary stage27. Another aspect which deserves closer
 study than it has hitherto had is of progressive reduction of size in succeeding
 periods. Alur’s study of the bones from Utnur revealed the presence, along¬
 side a majority of bones of normal size, of smaller percentages of very large,
 large and even small (though mature) bones, and my own preliminary survey
 of the bones from the excavation revealed a progressive increase in the
 percentages of small animals in succeeding periods28.
    My fourth problem concerns the study of man’s utilization of his domestic
 animals. How neglected this aspect has been can be seen from the fact that so
 far there has been no study of the animal remains from any of the great
 cities of the Ganges valley (except Hastinapur). Thus we are unable to use
 the evidence of archaeology to throw objective light upon the developing
                             Early domestic animals in India and Pakistan        321

food habits of North India during protohistoric or early historic times. The
significance of such a research project is obvious: even though it goes far
beyond the range of domestication as hunted animals, fish and fowl must also
be recorded. Alur has recently confirmed my comment that the many split
bones from Utnur indicated that cattle formed an item of diet at that time.
There is growing evidence of the use of cattle bones for tools. He has also
drawn attention to a somewhat unexpected evidence of utilization of the
Utnur catde. He points out that the anchylosis of the bones of the hock joint
is typical of that occurring in modern draft animals, and must here too indicate
that the cattle were used for heavy draft or weight bearing purposes29. What
these may have been demands attention.
  In conclusion it seems worth repeating that the stage is now set, in this as
in palaeobotanical and other environmental studies, for substantial advances
in our knowledge in both India and Pakistan, provided that suitable centres
for collecting data can be established, and that a few specialists are able to give
their attention to these questions.




      Notes

       1 Sewell, R. B. S. and Guha, B. S. (1931). Being Chapter XXXI of Marshall,
         J. (1931). Mohenjo-daro and the Indus Civilization. London, pp. 649-73.
       2 Prasad, B. (1936). Animal remains from Harappa Memoirs of the Archae¬
         ological Survey of India, 51.
       3 Lai, B. B. (1955). Excavations at Hastinapura, Ancient India, 10 and 11.
       4 Allchin, F. R. (1961). Piklihal Excavations. Hyderabad.
       5 Sankalia, H. D., Subbarao, B. and Deo, S. B. (1958). Excavation at
         Maheshwar and Navdatoli. Baroda.
       6 Rao, S. R. (1963). Excavation at Rangpur, Ancient India 18 and 19.
       7 Thapar, B. K. (1957). Maski 1954. Ancient India 13.
       8 Casal, J.-M. (1961). Fouilles de Mundigak; and Poulain, J. B. (1966).
         Etude de la faune, Bull, de VEcole frangaise de VExtreme Orient. 53,
         pp. H9-35-
       9 Sankalia, H. D. et. al., (i960). From History to Prehistory at Nevasa. Poona.
      10 Allchin, F. R. (1963). Excavations at Utnur, Hyderabad.
      11 Clutton Brock, J. (1965). Excavations at Langhnaj: 1944-63. Pt. II. The
         Fauna. Poona.
      12 Joshi, R. V. (1961). Indian Archaeology a review 1960-61, pp. 12-16 and
         ibid, (in press) “Late Mesolithic culture in Central India”. I am indebted
         to Dr. Joshi for his kind permission to refer to the unpublished paper. I
         understand that the study of the animal remains has been made by Sri
         Bholanath, but that it is also unpublished.
      13 Clutton-Brock, J. (1965). ibid.
      14 Joshi, R. V. (In press), ibid.
      15 My wife and I have discussed the hypothetical relations between the
         earliest “Neolithic” cultural groups and the late stone age inhabitants of
         peninsular India in a paper which is still in press.
      16 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, pp.
         236-40.
      17 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. p. 236. We have discussed the art historical
322   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication         allchin


           aspect in greater detail in Birth of Indian civilization. London (1968). pp.
           306-7.
       18 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. p. 37, and Alur, K. R. in his unpublished study
          of the animal remains from Utnur. Alur expressly mentions the occur¬
          rence of the supraspinous process on a number of thoracic vertebrae.
      19 Watt, G. (1908). The Commercial Products of India. London, pp. 732-3.
      20 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. pp. 51-2.
      21 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. p. 56.
      22 Zeuner, F. E. (1936). op. cit. p. 332.
      23 The sites are Hallur and Sangankal respectively. I am indebted to Dr.
          Nagaraja Rao for the information.
      24 Prasad, B. (1936). op. cit. pp. 58-9.
      25 Information from Shri B. K. Thapar.
      26 Sewell, R. B. S. and Guha, B. S. (1931). op. cit. pp. 655-8.
      27 Alur, K. R. (Unpublished) 1967. Note on the animal remains from Utnur.
          Professor Alur has recently made a study of remains from a number of
          other excavations of Neolithic-Chalcolithic sites in southern India, and
          reports that similar variations in the medullary cavities of cattle bones
          occur at more than one site.
      28 Allchin, F. R. (1963). op. cit. pp. 62-3.
      29 Alur, K. R. (Unpublished) 1967. ibid.
      F. R. ALLCHIN


      Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan


Until recently the history of early cultivation in the Indian subcontinent
depended entirely upon textual references. During the 1930s reports were
published of plant remains at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa; and in the past
two decades more than twenty excavations of later prehistoric or proto-
historic sites have produced plant materials, now in various stages of publica¬
tion. The aim of this short paper is to present an outline of the picture supplied
by this evidence, to draw attention to the wealth of material in India and
Pakistan (Fig. 1), and to suggest the need for further research, both in the
field and the laboratory. For the purposes of this discussion the Indian sub¬
continent may be divided into three major provinces: a western or Indus
province, roughly corresponding to modern West Pakistan; a southern or
Peninsular province; and a north-eastern or Gangetic province. All the finds
so far reported belong to one or other of these three.



      Western or Indus province

This province includes the great alluvial tracts of the Indus system, and the
upland valleys of Baluchistan. It is throughout an area of low rainfall and
considerable variation of temperature between winter and summer. It is also
that part of the subcontinent in which the earliest evidence of settlements of
cultivators or pastoralists is to be found. The reported plant remains are as
follows:

1 Cereals.   The principal grains so far recorded are wheat and barley, but as
comparatively little excavation has been done the picture is probably far from
complete. At Mundigak (in period II ? late fourth millennium b.c.) grains of
club wheat (Triticum compactum) are reported1. No evidence is yet available
from pre-Harappan levels in the Indus valley, but from the excavated
Harappan sites (c. 2200-1750 b.c.) there is more evidence. Two varieties of
wheat, the club wheat and an Indian dwarf wheat (T. sphaerococcum) are
324   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   allchin




reported, as well as two varieties of barley, a small seeded six rowed variety
(Hordeum vulgare) and a sub-species (H. vulgare var. nudum)2.


2 Leguminous plants.     From the Indus civilization the field pea (Pisum
arvense) is reported3.


3 Oilseeds.    Also from the Harappan civilization two oilseeds are recorded.
From Harappa came a lump of sesamum, a plant whose antiquity in India
may be judged from the fact that it gave its name tila to all kinds of oil {tel,
etc.)4. From Chanhu-daro seeds of mustard, identified as most probably
Brassica juncea were obtained5.


4 Fruits.     Several varieties are reported from Harappan times, and one
from an earlier context. From Mundigak II comes evidence of Zizyphus
                           Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan     325

vulgaris, then probably as now wild or only semi-domestic6. From Harappan
contexts come dates and seeds of melon7.


5 Other crops.   There is evidence that a variety of cotton (Gossypium sp.) was
cultivated in the Indus civilization. Apart from actual fibres surviving in
contact with copper tools and a silver vessel, at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa,
numerous woven textile impressions are reported on faience vessels, etc.8 It
is also reported that the fibres from Mohenjo-daro had been dyed with some
substance, probably a madder. The European madder (Rubia tinctorum) is
still cultivated in Sindh9.



      Southern or peninsular province

This province is comparatively more varied in climate, rainfall in particular
varying between tropical rain and semi-desert precipitation. The evidence is
from recent excavations and much is as yet incompletely published.


1 Cereals.   Early evidence of wheat cultivation is restricted to the north-west
of the province. Both Triticum vulgare and T. compactum have been identified
by Dr. Vishnu Mittre throughout the chalcolithic occupation at Navdatoli
(c. 1800-1200 b.c.)10; and its cultivation seems to have spread towards the
south to occur at Sonegaon towards the end of this period11. The province
produces the earliest evidence so far for rice cultivation. Rice husks and
spikelet impressions on pottery and clay are reported at both Lothal and
Rangpur IIA (that is, probably towards the end of the Harappan period)12.
Rice (Oryza saliva) is again reported in phases II-IV at Navdatoli (c. 1600-
1200 b.c.)13; and spread to the south to appear at Hallur in an early Iron Age
context (c. 900-800 b.c.)14, and yet later in Iron Age graves from the Tamil
coastal plains. Rice husk impressions are not infrequently encountered in
sites of the Gujarat coast during the second millennium          b.c.   (personal
observation), but these have not yet been studied. Rice is further reported at
Kaundinyapur in Maharashtra (c. 500 b.c.)15. From the peninsula comes the
first evidence in India of another important group of cereal crops. At both
Hallur and at Paiyampalli grains of finger millet (Eleusine coracana, ragi) are
reported, in the former case dating to about 1800 b.c.16 Another grain from
Rangpur III (c. 1200 b.c.) has been identified as possibly the bulrush millet
(Pennisetum typhoideum, bdjra)17, and the same millet has been tentatively
identified at Hallux, although in both cases there is a possibility that it may
rather be Paspalum scrobiculatum, kodon18. Firm evidence of both the bulrush
and finger millets, as well as of kodon, comes from Nevasa at the opening
of the Christian era, from where too comes the earliest archaeological occur¬
rence in India of the great millet (Andropogon sorghum), evidently a late
arrival upon the scene19. Kaundinyapur also yields the first evidence of maize
326   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     ALLCHIN


(Zea mays) in the subcontinent, in the form of grain impressions on pottery.
It is not clear from the published sources what is the date of its occurrence,
one source referring it to a house of the Bahmani period (c. fifteenth century
a.d.), another assigning the type of pottery to the eighth to ninth century a.d.20



2 Leguminous plants.     The peninsula also provides the first evidence of the
cultivation of several species of leguminous plants. From Tekkalakota I (c.
1800-1600 b.c.) and Paiyampalli come examples of horse gram (Dolichos
biflorus)21, and from the latter site and from Navdatoli comes green gram
(Phaseolus radiatus)22. Navdatoli yielded a very rich series of plants from its
chalcolithic levels, including black gram (Ph. mungo), lentil {Lens culinaris),
the grass pea {Lathyrus sativus), the field pea {Pisum arvense), and several
other leguminous weeds23. Evidently another late arrival in India was the
chick-pea or cana gram {Cicer arietinum), which first appears in period IV
at Nevasa (third to first century b.c.)24.


3 Oilseeds.    The only early oilseed so far reported in the peninsula is linseed
{Linum usitatissimum) which occurred throughout the occupation at Nav¬
datoli25. That one of its uses may have been to prepare flax may be inferred
from the discovery of spun fibres in a string of beads from a burial at Chandoli
(c. 1400-1200 B.C.)26.


4 Fruits.     The Indian jujube (Zizyphus jujuba, her) is reported at Navdatoli;
and the myrobalan {Phyllanthus emblica, amalaka) at the same site27. Whether
either of these were strictly cultivated is open to doubt. Wood of the date
palm is probably reported at Utnur, and date palm matting impressions also
at Tekkalakota, but no date stones have been reported28. In modern times
the date is cultivated, in the Deccan, rather for its juice which is fermented
to make tadl than for its fruit.


5 Other crops.     The cultivation of cotton in the peninsula is first attested
by the second half of the second millennium at Nevasa, where a thread of
silk and cotton was discovered in a string of beads from a burial29. I have also
recently noticed textile impressions, apparendy of cotton, on a number of
early Iron Age sherds from southern Mysore.




      Northern or Gangetic province

This province coincides with the alluvial plains of the Ganges system. It
witnesses a marked increase in rainfall and corresponding moderation of
winter cold as one moves eastwards to the delta. Although much excavation
has taken place comparatively little plant evidence has so far been reported.
                               Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan   327


1 Cereals.       Only one grain has so far been discovered, rice. At Hastinapur
and at Noh rice is found during the period of the Painted Grey ware (c. 1000-
500 b.c.)30. My own observation suggests that rice husks were frequently
added to pottery of this and the following period in the central Ganges valley.
Rice is again reported at Sonpur (c. 800-600 b.c.)31 and from the western
margins of the delta at Mahisadal and Pandu Rajar Dhibi already before the
arrival of iron (i.e. prior to 700 b.c.)32. The importance or rice for the economy
of North India is evident from the frequent references in later Vedic literature,
from the time of the Yajur Veda Samhita onwards, and by the opening of the
Christian era Susruta distinguishes no less than thirty-nine varieties33.


2 Other crops.       There is as yet no other evidence for other cultivated plants
in this province.


The evidence so far assembled prompts one to form a number of tentative
conclusions both on the plants themselves and on the related subject of their
discovery, study and preservation. As far as I am aware there is no single
centre, or group of centres to which this material may be sent and where it
may be studied and preserved. Dr. Vishnu Mittre of the Birbal Sahni
Institute at Lucknow has been responsible for many of the published identi¬
fications, and it would seem that this centre might well form a national home
for archaeological plant remains of this kind. It is evident that not all field
archaeologists are equally interested in collecting this sort of material, and it
is to be hoped that its considerable importance may become generally
appreciated. A number of the principal grains and plants found in the Indus
province, and even in adjacent parts of the peninsula, appear to have been
first domesticated in West Asia and to have entered South Asia probably
along with the spread of cultivation in subsequent centuries. On the other
hand, Professor Sir Joseph Hutchinson has pointed out to me the probability
that certain of the millets, notably Eleusine and Pennisetum, were first domes¬
ticated in Africa34. It will be interesting to enquire whether they reached the
Indian peninsula by land (in which case it may be expected that traces will be
found in intermediate areas) or by some other route, perhaps by sea. Several
of the plants are almost certainly indigenous. Among those we notice rice,
cotton, sesamum, and Indian mustard. There is regrettably no archaeological
evidence as yet for the antiquity of a number of other important Indian plants,
and it is still necessary to rely upon the evidence afforded by literature.
Among these plants we may cite sugar cane, first mentioned in the Atharva
Veda (before 800 b.c.), and the black pepper (Piper nigrum), for which the
earliest references are in the Apastambha Dharmasutra, probably before 500
b.c. Archaeological evidence is still awaited for a number of other cultivated
plants, for example yams (.surana) for which the earliest literary evidence is
in Caraka (first to second century a.d.). There are, however, as we have seen,
several instances in which evidence so far available appears to support the
12—DOPAA     *   *
328   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    allchin


literary record. For example, respecting the relative lateness of the introduction
of Cicer arietinum, for which the earliest references are in Rdmdyaha Uttara-
kanda Baudhyayana Grhya Sesasiitra, and Susruta samhita (suggesting
collectively dates between the first and fourth centuries a.d.), or of Sorghum
millet, whose earliest references are in Caraka, Bhela and Kasyapa Samhitas
(suggesting collectively a similar range of dates). The new perspectives
provided by archaeology hold out great hopes for a reappraisal of other types
of evidence. It is evident that much useful work could still be done in plotting
the modern dialect names for different species and considering them in a
historical light. Such “linguistic palaeontology” is likely to yield useful
information, now that the chronological dimensions are beginning to appear.




      Notes

       1 Casal, J.-M. (1961). Fomlles de Mundigak. Appendix XIII by R. Porteres,
         Paris, pp. 259-60.
       2 Marshall, J. (1931)- Mohenjo-daro and the Indus civilization. London,
         vol. 2. pp. 587-9; Mackay, E. J. H. (1943). Chanhu-daro excavations. New
         Haven, p. 250; Vats, M. S. (1940). Excavations at Harappa. Delhi, pp.
         466-7.
       3 Mackay, E. J. H. (1943). ibid.; Vats, M. S. (1940). op. cit. p. 467.
       4 Vats, M. S. (1940). ibid.
       5 Mackay, E. J. H. (1943). ibid.
       6 Casal, J.-M. (1961). op. cit. p. 260.
       7 Vats, M. S. (1940). ibid.
       8 Marshall, J. (1931). op. cit. pp. 585-6; Mackay, E. J. H. (1938). Further
         Excavations at Mohenjo-daro. Delhi, pp. 583, 591-4; Vats, M.S. (1940).
         op. cit. p. 466.
       9 Watt, G. (1908). The Commercial Products of India. London, pp. 926-7.
      10 Vishnu Mittre (1961). Plant economy in ancient Navdatoli and
         Maheshwar, Technical reports on archaeological remains, pp. 15-17.
      11 Indian archaeology—a Review, 1964-5.
      12 Rao, S. R. (1963). Excavations at Rangpur, Ancient India, 18 and 19.
         The note on the plant remains is by S. S. Ghosh and Krishna Lai, p. 168.
      13 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 18-19.
      14 Information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao.
      15 Vishnu Mittre (1966). Kaundinyapur plant economy in proto-historic
         and historic times, Palaeobotanist, 15, pp. 152-3.
      16 For Hallur, information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao, and for
         Paiyampalli information by courtesy of Shri S. R. Rao.
      17 Rao, S. R. (1963). op. cit. p. 169.
      18 For Hallur, information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao.
      19 Sankalia, H. D. et al. (i960). From History to Pre-History at Nevasa.
         Poona, pp. 529-30.
      20 Vishnu Mittre (1966). op. cit. pp. 152-6; Vishnu Mittre and Gupta, H. P.
         (1966). Pollen morphological studies of some primitive varieties of maize
         (Zea mays L.) with some remarks on the history of maize in India, Palaeo¬
          botanist, 15, pp. 176-84.
      21 Information by courtesy of Dr. Nagaraja Rao and Shri S. R. Rao.
      22 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 21-2.
      23 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 20-3.
                       Early cultivated plants in India and Pakistan       329


24 Sankalia, H. D. et al. (i960), ibid.
25 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 23-4.
26 Deo, S. B. and Ansari, Z. D. (1965). Chalcolithic Chandoli. Appendix iv,
   by Gulati, A. N. A note on the early history of flax. Poona, pp. 195-201.
27 Vishnu Mittre (1961). op. cit. pp. 24-5.
28 For Hallur, information from Dr. Nagaraja Rao. The observation for
   Utnur was our own, and has not so far been substantiated by further
   examination of specimens.
29 Gulati, A. N. (1961). A note on the early history of silk in India, Technical
   reports on archaeological remains, pp. 53-9.
30 Lai, B. B. (1955). Excavation at Hastinapura, Ancient India, 10 and 11.
   Appendix J, on plant remains by Chowdhury, K. A., and Ghosh, S. S.
   pp. 120-35; For Noh see Indian Archaeology—a Review, 1963-4, and
   ibid. 1964-5.
31 Indian Archaeology a review, 1960-1, p. 5.
32 For Pandu Rajar Dhibi see Das Gupta, P. C. (1964). Excavations at Pandu
   Rajar Dhibi. Calcutta, p. 14; for Mahisadal see Indian Archaeology—a
   Review, 1963-4.
33 Om Prakash (1961). Food and Drinks in Ancient India. Delhi, pp. 262-3.
34 On the origin of Eleusine coracana see Mehra, K. L. (1963). Considerations
   on the African origin of Eleusine coracana (L), Current Science, 32, p. 300.
■
      J. BURTON-PAGE

      The problem of the introduction of
      Adansonia digitata into India

The subject-matter of this paper relates to a period considerably later than
that of most of the others presented here. But, as an archaeologist working
in a comparatively late historical period, I welcome the opportunity to demon¬
strate that identity of interest, and a fortiori of approach, may occur when
purely historical documents fail. The period primarily concerned, the late
fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries, is well documented for political
history and for the development of religion, and the main features of the
cultural and social institutions of both the autochthones and the foreign
ruling classes are clear. But this documentary evidence can do littie more
than provide a general background to my problem, which seems to have
some connexion with a foreign menial class about whom all information (save
their occasional involvement in political history) is scanty in the extreme.
  The baobab, Adansonia digitata, is commonly “not supposed to be a
native”, says Nairne1, although the family Bombaceae is well represented in
India by other genera. Hooker2 is more specific: the baobab, says he, is “a
native of Africa, not truly wild in India”, and in giving its distribution as
“tropical Africa” he mentions that it is “cultivated in various parts of India
and Ceylon”. But here “cultivated” must be interpreted with caution: the
tree has certainly been planted, as a specimen, in the botanical gardens of
Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, presumably under British direction; and there
seem to have been older plantings around Delhi and Allahabad which may
be attributed to the Mughal taste for curiosa around the end of the sixteenth
century. I can find no other evidence of its deliberate planting in modern
times. We can, however, be a little more precise concerning its Indian
distribution: Birdwood3 notes it as “generally found most abundant about the
old ports frequented by the early Mahommedan traders”, and it has indeed
been reported as growing in and around Janjira, Chaul and Surat, all towns
which would fall into this category. It does however also occur inland: where
it is found in any numbers (apart from the specimen trees already mentioned)
its greatest concentrations appear to be in Bldar and Bijapur in the Deccan;
in Burhanpur in the former principality of Khandesh; and above all in
332   Part III Regional and local evidence of domestication   burton-page




Malwa, in the towns of Chanderi and Mandu and its suburb Na'lcha. All of
these places (see Fig. i) were towns of some importance under the mediaeval
Muslim sultanates.
  The baobab’s onomastic status is suggestive. In Malwa it is known as
Khurasani imli, in Bijapur as Gorakh imli, in both cases taking part of its name
from the Tamarind, the true imli. The confusion is already found in c. 1595
in Abu’l-Fazl’s description of Malwa4: “here the tamarind grows as large as a
coconut, and its fruit is extremely white”. I can imagine no two trees less
likely to be confused from the appearance of stem, leaf or fruit; perhaps the
common feature of a fruit with an acid pulp is responsible for the baobab’s
sobriquet. The epithet Khurasani is fanciful, for the tree is unknown in
Khurasan; it seems to be no more than an elegant word meaning “foreign”,
as in American cloth, Russian salad; and I can find no reason for the Deccan
association with Gorakh (= Goraksanatha, the patron saint of an order of
yogis) unless there may be some association with death, for here the baobab
was traditionally the tree under which executions took place (why ? from its
being merely an easy landmark for a rendezvous, or because its leaflessness
all the year, except for the rains, suggested also lifelessness ?). The tree
cannot be identified in any old Indian flora, and appears to have no Sanskrit
name. Such negative linguistic evidence is of course inconclusive by itself,
                                 The introduction of the baobab into India   333


but it does seem to support the suggestion of an introduction in Islamic
times.
  If, then, we assume that the baobab is an introduced species, the questions
which arise are three: (a) when was it brought in? (b) for what purpose?
(c) by what means ? The date I shall refer to later; but we may observe here
that local tradition in Mandti5 supposes it to have been brought in to the area
under Mahmud Khaljl (1436-69). As to the means, Birdwood suggests
that it was either introduced by traders or carried across the Indian Ocean
by currents and winds, as certainly happened with Kigelia pinnata\ but per¬
haps militating against this latter suggestion is the apparent reluctance of the
baobab to regenerate naturally, even though the fruit germinates readily when
planted. And even if the fruit had arrived on the Indian shore by such an
accident, its transfer some 400 km. inland to the Malwa plateau can only have
been effected by man.
  The last question, for what purpose it was introduced, is more puzzling.
The tree now appears to have little value to man in India (even its natural role
as an inherently comic vegetable seems to be little appreciated), although it
appears somewhat surprisingly6 as one of the possible crude materials of
paper manufacture. I suspect that this happened merely because the tree
happened to be there; in any case if the early fifteenth-century introduction
can be supported, paper-making could not have been the prime purpose on
chronological grounds. I have found no evidence of its hollow trunks being
used as receptacles for water storage, as happens in certain African areas;
and in any case this would seem pointless in such a region as Malwa, where
surface water is not hard to find. Nor is there any evidence, as far as I am
aware, for the use of the hollow trunks for burial purposes, also reported
from parts of Africa. I have seen deer feeding on its fallen petals, but I know
of no instance of the petals being collected as cattle fodder (as with Bombax,
for example), nor yet for use in dyeing, as with a variety of Indian trees.
The only reference to other uses are of its fruits being “made into a refreshing
sherbet by Muslim women” in the Deccan7.
  A clue to its date and an adumbration of its connexion with a particular
class may be forthcoming from the fact that its distribution coincides strikingly
with those areas under Muslim control (Malwa, Khandesh, the Deccan, the
western ports) where Habshls were settled in considerable numbers. The
term Habshi, literally “Abyssinian”, refers in early Islam to slaves of Abys¬
sinian origin, but in India is applied to African slaves of other races, Bantu
and Somali, imported from the Horn of Africa8. The evidence for a total
terrestial correspondence is incomplete, as information is lacking on the
baobab in other Habshl-colonized areas: Bengal, Jawnpur, Ahmadnagar,
Asirgarh. Even so, the coincidence is suggestive, and if we may thus associate
the baobab with the Habshls we are given a terminus a quo: while there is
some evidence for yabshi slaves in north India as early as the beginning of the
thirteenth century, the great period of their expansion all over India was the
334   Part HI Regional and local evidence of domestication     burton-page


fourteenth; for example, the traveller Ibn Battuta9 comments on their presence
from north India to Ceylon on his journeys made between 1333 and 1342,
as guards and men-at-arms on land and sea. There is evidence that they were
in Gujarat in large numbers in the mid-fourteenth century, and well estab¬
lished in the Deccan at the time of Feroz Shah Bahmanl (1397-1422). The
island of Janjira was a Habshl possession from the early sixteenth century,
although Habshls had long before that been prominent in the Muslim navies
on the west coast of India. For Malwa there is no definite evidence of their
presence before the time of Mahmud Khalji, although they are known to
have been employed at the court in his and his son’s reigns to the tune of
thousands. This adds weight to the Mandu tradition reported above.
  If, as seems possible, there is a connection between the baobab and the
Habshls, the African tree and the African people, a powerful reason for the
tree’s introduction is still wanting. A slave people would hardly introduce it
as a specimen to remind them of home; the craving for a “refreshing sherbet”
is hardly convincing, as India is well provided with other natural resources
for such purposes (the modern instance of a powerful Western nation who
have been unable to sustain their existence overseas without a revolting sher¬
bet made from the stimulant coca and cola plants is scarcely an exact parallel;
fourteenth-century transport problems, especially for a slave people, are not
comparable with our own). It does seem possible, however, that its importa¬
tion for a cult purpose might have been permitted. What such a cult purpose
might have been does not seem possible to say; colleagues at the School of
Oriental and African studies concerned with African anthropology have not
yet been able to throw any light on possible baobab cults in east Africa or
along the coast10.
  It is obvious that more work needs to be done on the baobab and its
attendant problems. There has been no investigation of the age of the Indian
baobabs; although I understand that the Indian specimens, imposing though
many of them be, do not approach the African ones in size. More work needs
to be done on defining the distribution of the Indian baobabs. As I have
shown, I fear only too clearly, there is need for more investigation, if the data
are still ascertainable, on the anthropological side.



      Notes

      1 Nairne, A. K. (n.d.). Flowering Plants of Western India. London, s.v.
      2 Hooker, J. D. (1872-5). Flora of British India, 1. London, p. 348.
      3 Birdwood, C. (1886). Communication to Yule, H. (ed.) Hobson-Jobson.
        London, s.v. Monkey-bread tree (this name, however, is not used in
        India).
      4 Abu’l-Fazl (c. 1596). A'in-i Akbari, 2. (ed. Bibl. Ind.). p. 197.
      5 Yazdani, Gh. (1929). Mandu: the City of Joy. Oxford, p. 2.
      6 Watt, G. (1908). Commercial Products of India. London, p. 868.
      7 Cousens, H. (1916). Bijdpur and its Architectural Remains. Bombay, p. 57.
                           The introduction of the baobab into India   335


 8 For their history in India, see Burton-Page, J. (1965). “Habshi”, art, in
   Encyclopaedia of Islam. 2nd edition, 3. pp. 14-16.
 9 Defremery, C. and Sanguinetti, B. R. (1853-8). (eds.) Voyages d’Ibn
   Batouta, 4 (Arabic text and French trans.). Paris, pp. 31, 59-60, 93 and
   185.
10 My thanks are due to Professor P. H. Gulliver and Dr. D. J. Parkin for
   allowing me to pester them with questions of Adansoniology.
      JULIET GLUTTON-BROCK

       Carnivore remains from the excavations of the
      Jericho Tell

The extensive period covered by Dr. K. Kenyon’s1 excavations of the Jericho
Tell from the Mesolithic to the Byzantine provides an exceptionally favour¬
able opportunity for the study of animal remains. It is possible to assess the
composition of the wild faunal assemblage and to trace man’s exploitation
of this fauna and his introduction of exotic domesticated species. Carnivore
remains were found in every main habitation level except the mesolithic and
although specific identification has, in some cases, proved to be difficult, an
analysis of the number of carnivore bones and teeth has enabled assertions
to be made about the relative importance of the several genera that were
present throughout periods of habitation of the site. The absolute numbers2
of remains of each species are shown in Fig. i.
  The carnivore remains can be divided into three main groups, a wolf/jackal/
dog complex, foxes, and cats. These are described in systematic order. A
metrical comparison has been made of the canid remains from Jericho with
those from prehistoric cave sites in Palestine studied by Kurten3.



      Canidae

Canis spp.   Thirty-six bones and teeth of Canis spp. were found dispersed
throughout all levels of the excavations representing thirty-two individual
animals. Three of these specimens were burnt. The remains of Canis consist
mainly of isolated jaws or limb bones but there are four groups of articulated
bones that may be remnants of whole carcases, either purposefully buried or
thrown out on a rubbish pit. One nearly complete skeleton with jaws was
retrieved from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A, and a nearly complete forelimb
from the same period. Another complete limb was found in the Pre-Pottery B,
and a fragmentary skull and articulated long bones from a disturbed area
between the Early and Middle Bronze Age.
  Zeuner4 has said about his preliminary investigation of the canid remains
from the Pre-Pottery and Pottery Neolithic of Jericho that “. . . it is certain
 338     Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   clutton-brock




HO No.




       Neolithic   Neolithic A Neolithic B     Neolithic          Age
  Fig i Absolute numbers (see text note (2)) of carnivore bones and teeth
       from the main phases of habitation of the Jericho Tell. Polecat and
         marten included with the cats.


  already that there was considerable variation in size which suggests the
  presence of several breeds (of domestic dog). One was of fox terrier size,
  another that of the pariah dog.” This report was based on the examination of
  mandible fragments and isolated teeth of which Plate vi(ii) is one. Contrary
  to Zeuner’s statement, careful measurement of all the Jericho specimens does
  not show any great diversity in size of bones and teeth. Many are indeed the
  size of pariah dogs as represented by skulls in the British Museum (Natural
  History) but a disconcerting fact is discovered when a survey is made of skulls
  of the jackals, wolves, and dogs that are found at the present day in the Near
  East. This is that each species overlaps the others in size, and morphological
  differentiation on skeletal or dental structure is in many cases impossible.
  Fossil evidence suggests that two sub species of jackal occurred in the Palestine
  area in post Pleistocene times. These were Canis aureus lupaster, a large jackal,
  now confined to North Africa, and the common jackal, Canis aureus aureus.5
  Cams aureus lupaster, the Egyptian jackal, is considerably larger than the
  common jackal, and overlaps in size of bones and teeth the pariah dog and
                                           Carnivore remains from Jericho     339


the local Arabian wolf, Canis lupus arabs. No canid remains were found at
Jericho that can be identified as Canis aureus aureus.
  In recent years much discussion has been given to the problem of specific
identification of canid remains from early prehistoric sites in the Near East,
and the general pattern that is emerging shows that these specimens often
cannot be distinguished as dog, wolf, or jackal. In 1937 Bate6 described the
discovery of a Natufian “dog” from Mount Carmel and for many years this
was thought to be one of the earliest records of domestication. Reinvestigation
of this “dog” skull has shown however that it cannot be distinguished from
Canis lupus arabs1. Further discussion of the problems of identification of
Near Eastern canids has been provided by many authors8.
  Measurement of the Canis bones and teeth from Jericho shows that their
size overlaps that of present day pariah dogs, C. lupus arabs, and C. aureus
lupaster. The most commonly found tooth was the lower carnassial (Mi) of
which there were nine, representing seven individuals (four comprise two
pairs). The labial length of these teeth are given below (in the case of the pairs
the mean of the two is given) and compared with measurements of the teeth
of post-glacial canids given by Kurten. Kurten measured all the carnivore
skull and tooth specimens from excavations of the Palestine caves of Mount
Carmel, Kebarah, Shukbah, Zuttiyeh, and Ksar ’Akil, that are in the British
Museum (Natural History) and made a statistical comparison with present
day specimens. In the case of the wolf, measurements show that there has
been a very marked post-glacial dwarfing. The fossil wolf of the late Pleistocene
in Palestine was the same size as the present day European wolf but at the
end of the Pleistocene a drastic reduction in size occurred that was probably
stabilized by Mesolithic times. In the past confusion arose over the identi¬
fication of canid remains from archaeological sites in Palestine because this
post-Pleistocene dwarfing was not recognized. The Natufian canid remains
from Mount Carmel are the same size as those from prehistoric Jericho, and
the same size as the living wolves to be found in the Palestine area.
  It can be seen from the table that on size the lower carnassial teeth from
Jericho fall most closely within Kurten’s observed range for fossil specimens
of C. aureus lupaster from Palestine.
  Measurement of the bones and teeth of Canis spp. from Jericho gives no
clear indication of which species are present nor of sure evidence for domesti¬
cation. There are, however, two mandibles in which the premolar teeth have
been so crowded and displaced that they may have belonged to tamed wolves
if not to domesticated dogs. For it is now generally recognized on anatomical
and behavioural grounds that the progenitor of the dog was the small Asiatic
wolf.
  In early societies such as the Pre-Pottery Neolithic of Jericho there must
have been a sequence of wild to tamed wolf to dog, that is to a definite breed
that can be said to be fully domesticated after generations of breeding in
340   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication             CLUTTON-brock
-—-

captivity. Osteological characters cannot provide evidence for distinguishing
tamed wolf from early domestic dog and it is in fact still doubtful how clear
are the distinctions between wild and tamed wolves. But it is of course
possible to distinguish wild wolf from fully domestic dog. There is no evidence
for such a dog from any of the Jericho levels.
  One of the two mandibular rami. No. M.15.10A, that shows crowding of
the teeth (Plate vi (iii)) comes from the earliest level to contain animal bones,
the Protoneolithic, dated at earlier than 9000 b.p. It is a smaller jaw than any
of the other specimens and the alveoli of the 1st and 2nd premolars are
considerably displaced. It is however only a fragment of charred bone without
teeth and specific identification cannot be made from such a small piece of
jaw. In fact the possibility that it belonged to a member of the genus Cuon
rather than Canis cannot be discounted.


                                             O.R.             M.           S.D.     V.
        Species                   N.*        mm.              mm.          mm.     mm.

Canis aureus aureus
  Recent only                     II      16-1 -18-9      17-77 ± 0-28      0-93   5-2
Canis aureus lupaster
  Fossil                           6      20-4 -23-7     21-75 ± o-6i      1-37    6-3
  Recent                           7      19-5 -22-5     20-86 ± 0-37      0-99    4-7
Canis lupus arabs
  From Wurm                        6      25-1 -31-6     28-20 ± 1-oo      2-50    8-9
  Post-glacial                     2      23-8 -24-3     24-05              —

  Palestine Recent                 5      21-7 -24-2     23-10 ± 0-50       I-IO   4-6
Canis spp. Jericho
  Pre-Pottery A—EB/MB              7      20-65-23-75    22-03 rt 0-41      1-09   4‘95

  * Abbreviations: N—number of specimens measured; O.R.—observed range; M—mean ±
tandard error of the mean; S.D.—standard deviation; V—coefficient of variation.

Table 1 Labial lengths of the lower first molar of canis spp. from Jericho
      compared with those of Canis aureus aureus, Canis aureus lupaster, and
      Canis lupus arabs, quoted from Kurten.(a)
  (a) Kurten, B. (1965). The carnivora of the Palestine caves, Acta Zool. Fenn.


  The second mandibular ramus, No. O.6.21J (Plate vi(i)), that shows
crowding of the teeth was found in the Pottery Neolithic. The cheek teeth are
very large in relation to the length of the ramus (Length of Mi, 23-25 mm.),
and they had come to be compacted in order to be accommodated in the jaw.
It is generally recognized that this compaction and displacement of large teeth
is a diagnostic character of early domestic dogs, but there are as yet no
statistics to show how often it may occur in wild populations of canids.
  All the remaining Canis jaws have large well spaced teeth and there is no
justification for claiming that they belonged to domesticated dogs. There is
so little evidence for the specific identification of the Canis remains from
Jericho that it has been decided that for the present they should only be
described as Canis spp.
                                                Carnivore remains from Jericho      341




       Vulpes vulpes

A total number of 203 bones and teeth of fox have been collected from all
levels, representing 134 individual animals. Remains of foxes greatly out¬
number those of any other carnivore. The great majority of these fox bones
comes from the earliest levels. There are no mammalian bones and teeth
from the Mesolithic but in the Proto-Neolithic there are eighteen fox bones
and teeth representing thirteen individual animals, whereas all other mamma¬
lian remains from this period only number nine specimens. In the Pre-
Pottery A levels, the 105 fox specimens still outnumber those of any other
species. From the Pre-Pottery B levels onwards the number of foxes repre¬
sented steadily decreases.
  It can only be assumed that foxes were eaten and hunted for furs by the
Proto-Neolithic and Pre-Pottery people along with any other wild animals that
could be caught. Fox bones and teeth are found as individual specimens


                                              O.R.             M.           S.D.    V.
           Period                   N.*       mm.              mm.          mm.    mm.

Post-glacial                        55     136 -17-1      15-24 ± o-ii      o-8i   5-3
Shukbah A                            6     14-0 -15-0     14-37 ± 0-15      0-37   2-6
Recent                               9     12-2 -14-8     13-76 dt 0-30     0-91   6-6
Jericho Pre-Pottery Neolithic        3     I3-I9JI3-351   14-15              —     —
                                           16-0
Jericho Pre-Pottery A               17     12-55-15-80    I3-85 ± 0-22      0-92   5-4
Jericho Pre-Pottery B                2     12-00-14-90    13-45              —     —
Jericho Pre-Pottery A/B              1           15-65          —            —     —
Jericho Byzantine                    1           14-10          —            —     —
Jericho all levels                  24     12-00-16-00    I3-94 ± 0-22      1-09   7-82


  * Abbreviations: N—number of specimens measured; O.R.—observed range; M—mean ±
standard error of the mean; S.D.—standard deviation; V—coefficient of variation.

Table 2 Labial length of the lower first molar of Vulpes vulpes(a) from Jericho
     compared with those measured by Kurten both fossil and recent.
  (a) Kurtto, B. (1965). The carnivora of the Palestine caves, Acta Zool. Fenn.


widely dispersed through the early levels of the excavations and 7% of the
bones are burnt. This is approximately the same percentage as is found for
the remains of other food animals. The nine bones and mandible fragments
from the Byzantine may however represent a single animal that was killed
as a pest and not eaten but thrown out, for the bones were found together
in a rubbish pit.
   Kurten9 also found that foxes outnumbered in their remains all other
species from the cave excavations, Kurten’s statistical analysis of the
measurements of fox teeth from these caves has shown that there has been a
marked change in size of the fox since the last glaciation. In post-mesolithic
times there has been a reduction in size of the fox similar to that found by
342   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   clutton-brock


Kurten for the wolf and the wild cat. The population represented by fossils
from level A at Shukbah is intermediate in size between the large mesolithic
form and the present day fox. Shukbah A is of uncertain date but it is later
than the underlying mesolithic strata and could be similar to the Proto-
neolithic of Jericho, that is it is later than 7800 ± 210 B.C.
  A comparison may be made with Kurten’s measurements of fossil foxes
from the Palestine caves and with those of the Jericho specimens. As with
Canis spp. the most commonly found tooth was the lower carnassial. A table
is therefore given below of Kurten’s measurements for this tooth compared
with those from Jericho.
  Unfortunately the sample of teeth from the Proto-Neolithic is too small
to reflect any size change from fox teeth of later periods but it is noteworthy
that in agreement with Kurten’s measurements the largest fox carnassial
(L.—16-oo mm.) does come from the earliest levels and it is possible that
these Proto-Neolithic foxes were rather larger animals than the Palestinian
fox of the present day.
  Zeuner10 notes that the remains of foxes that have been killed for food are
not uncommon finds from early archaeological sites. In the neolithic lake-
dwellings of Switzerland fox bones were common and bore cutting and tooth
marks that showed they had been eaten by humans. Fox remains have also
been recorded in large numbers by Degerbol from the Maglemose of Den¬
mark. Flannery11 also comments on the remains of foxes amongst food
debris from prehistoric sites in Iran.



       Ursidae

 Ursus arctos. Only a single bone of bear has been retrieved from the Jericho
excavations. With the absence of lion remains and the scarcity of leopard
this is surprising and suggests that throughout the long period of habitation
over which the excavation extended, there was very little hunting of large
carnivores.



       Incertae sedis

 Vormela peregusna. The complete facial and maxillary region of the skull of a
 small carnivore was found in the Middle Bronze Age. The cranium is missing
 and most of the teeth except for two canines and two premolars. This skull
 has been provisionally identified as belonging to the marbled polecat,
 Vormela peregusna.
   Mai tes martes. A single metapodial bone, provisionally identified as marten
 was found in the Pre-Pottery A.
                                           Carnivore remains from Jericho     343



      Felidae

There are at least four types of wild felid represented by fragmentary bones
and teeth. The lack of complete bones however makes it difficult to differentiate
the species with the exception of the leopard. Three bones of leopard have
been identified; a second phalanx from the Pre-Pottery B, a charred cal-
caneum from the Pottery Neolithic, and a first phalanx from the Middle
Bronze Period. This bone was severely damaged during life, only the anterior
surface of the shaft remains and there is no marrow cavity.
  The leopard {Panthera pardus) is the largest felid present; it is surprising
that there are no lion remains, for lions must have been abundant in the
mountains of Palestine throughout prehistoric times as they were in historic
times until at least the Roman Period12.
  Apart from the leopard bones there are thirty-six other felid bones and
teeth representing twenty-nine individual cats. The majority of these come
from the Pre-Pottery levels and the bones were found with other food
remains.
  It is extremely difficult to determine the species of these cat bones, which
are mostly in a very fragmentary condition. It was decided that the most
practicable way of dealing with the specimens was to grade them according
to size and suggest the species present on this basis. The largest of the bones
and teeth may belong to the caracal lynx, Felis caracal, although the teeth
are not identical in cusp shape with those of caracal skulls in the British
Museum (Natural History).
 The next group of cat remains, smaller than those ascribed to the caracal
lynx, falls most closely within the size of F. chaus. Twelve skeletal bones of this
species were found in the Pre-Pottery periods, the Pottery Neolithic and the
Middle Bronze Age.
 The smallest cat bones and teeth have been identified as belonging to
F. lybica. Fourteen specimens of this cat have been found from the Proto-
neolithic and Pre-Pottery Neolithic periods but none from later levels. The
Libyan cat has been suggested as being the ancestor of the domestic cat13
and it has similar body proportions to the domestic cat. Zeuner14 has con¬
sidered the possibility that the small cat remains from Jericho could have
been those of domesticated animals but there is no osteological evidence for
this.
   Kurten15 measured the teeth of all the fossil cats from excavations in
Palestine caves that are in die collection of the British Museum (Natural
History). He made a statistical comparison of these fossil cat teeth with those
of recent specimens and found that, as with the other carnivores, there was a
drastic reduction in size of the wild cat of Palestine at the beginning of the
 Mesolithic.
  It is not practical to compare Kurten’s measurements with those of the
344   Part HI Regional and local evidence for domestication        clutton-brock


Jericho cats because of the small number of specimens from Jericho and the
uncertainty of their specific identification.



      Discussion

It can be seen from the above descriptions that the numbers of carnivore
remains from Jericho, with the exception of minor finds such as the few
leopard and bear bones, comprise a total of thirty-six specimens of Canis spp.,
two hundred and three of foxes and thirty-six of cat. Were any of these
animals domesticated ? The osteological evidence for the presence of domestic
dogs is slender and rests on the few jaws that had compacted teeth. The very
large number of fox bones in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic implies that this canid
was the most heavily exploited carnivore during these early periods. It is
however more likely that scavenging foxes were killed (perhaps by trapping)
for meat and skins rather than that they were tamed or domesticated. The
same must be true of the cats, and wolves and jackals would have been killed
and eaten whenever they could be caught.
  The lack of domestic dog bones in the Bronze Age periods remains a
mystery. A comparison may be made here with the Bronze Age site of
Emporio on the island of Chios, Greece16 where remains of undoubted
domestic dog were common. At Emporio there were forty bones and teeth
of Bronze Age dogs, whereas, amongst the very much larger total number of
bones at Jericho, there are only seven Bronze Age specimens of Canis spp.
This does not necessarily mean, of course, that the Bronze Age people of
Jericho did not keep dogs, only that they did not eat them. It is possible that
dogs were considered to be “unclean” animals and that their carcases were
thrown outside the city walls. In this case their remains would not be found
with those of food animals in the habitation levels17.



      Notes

      1 Kenyon, K. M. (1957). Digging up Jericho. London; Kenyon, K. M.
        (i960). Archaeology in the Holy Land. London.
      2 Where two or more bones were found in articulation these were counted
        as one specimen. Because of the dispersion of the bones over the very wide
        range of levels it is reasonable to assume that these absolute numbers do in
        fact represent the minimum number of individuals present.
      3 Kurten, B. (1965). The carnivora of the Palestine caves, Acta Zool. Fenn.
      4 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, p. 94.
      5 Bodenheimer, F. S. (1935)- Animal life in Palestine. Jerusalem; Harrison,
        D. L. (1968). The Mammals of Arabia, II. Carnivora, Hydracoidea,
        Artiodactyla. London.
      6 Bate, D. M. A. (1937), in Garrod, D. A. E. and Bate, D. M. A. The Stone
        Age of Mount Carmel, Excavations at the Wady El-Mughara, I. Oxford,
        pp.I57-253-
                                       Carnivore remains from Jericho      345

 7 Clutton-Brock, J. (1962). Near Eastern canids and the affinities of the
   Natufian dogs, Z. Tierzucht. ZiichtBioL, 76, pp. 326-33.
 8 Degerbpl, M. (1961). On a find of a Preboreal domestic dog (Canis
   familiar is L.) from Star Carr, Yorkshire, with remarks on other domestic
   dogs, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 27, pp. 35-55; Kurten, B. (1965). ibid.; Lawrence,
    B. (1956), in Field, H. An anthropological reconnaissance in the Near
    East, 1950, Papers Peabody Mus. Harvard, 48 (2), App. E., pp. 80-1;
    Lawrence, B. (1967). Early domestic dogs, Sonderdruck ausZ.f. Saiigetier-
    kunde, 32 (1), pp. 44-59; Reed, C. A. (i960). A review of archaeological
    evidence on animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East, in Braid-
    wood, R. J. and Howe, B. Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi Kurdistan,
    Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilisation, Oriental Inst., Chicago, 31,
    pp. 119-45; Reed, C. A. (1961). Osteological evidence for prehistoric
    domestication in South-western Asia, Z. Tierzucht. ZiichtBioL, 76, p. 38.
 9 Kurten, B. (1965). ibid.
10 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit.
11 Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100; Flannery, K. V. (1967), in
    Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. The prehistory of Western Iran: a pre¬
    liminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp. 147-207.
12 Bodenheimer, F. S. (i960). Animal and Man in Bible Lands. Leiden.
13 Bodenheimer, F. S. (1935). ibid.; Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit.
14 Zeuner, F. E. (1958). Dog and cat in the Neolithic of Jericho, Palestine
    Exploration Quarterly, pp. 52-5.
15 Kurten, B. (1965). ibid.
16 Clutton-Brock, J. (In press). Animal remains from the Bronze Age
    Excavations of Emporio, Chios, in Hood, M. S. F. Excavations at the
    Bronze Age Site of Emporio, Chios, Greece.
17 The work for this report was aided by a grant from the National Environ¬
    mental Research Council to Dr. Kathleen Kenyon, to whom I am
    additionally indebted for the time she spent answering my many queries
    on the complicated phases of the excavation. My thanks are due to Pro¬
    fessor Dimbleby of the Department of Human Environment, Institute of
    Archaeology, London, for the use of one of his research rooms and to Dr.
    F. C. Fraser and Miss J. E. King of the Osteology Room at the British
    Museum (Natural History) for the facilities that they offered me during
    the course of the work.
      G. W. I. HODGSON

      Some difficulties of interpreting the metrical data
      derived from the remains of cattle at the Roman
      settlement of Corstopitum


Metrical data have been obtained on the bones of domestic Bos brachyceros
and Ovis aries excavated from the Roman settlement of Corstopitum in the
years 19661 and 19672. These data, when treated with those published by
Meek and Gray3 for the excavations from 1906-10, provide a major source
of metrical data referring to the long bones of sheep and cattle from the
Romano-British period. The indications are that the site will continue to yield
more skeletal material for several years to come4.



      Cattle long bones

The validity of treating the 1911 published data together with those data
obtained by the author may seem open to question. However, “Student” t
tests, to establish the significance between the means of samples of measure¬
ments published for the distal widths of cattle metapodials3 and those
excavated in 1966 and measured by the author, suggest that the differences
between the means are not significant at probabilities of 0-05 and o-oi. The
test employed applies to a normal distribution, so an investigation was made
to see if the distribution of measurements about their mean values was
similar to a normal curve. Cornu’s criterion5 was applied to the distal width
measurements of cattle metapodials. This test compares the standard devia¬
tion (s.d.) with arithmetic mean deviation from the average values (e); for
Cornu’s Value:
                  s.d.
                v = 1-25
                        2|jc — x\
                            n
348     Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   HODGSON


The values obtained were:


    (a) metacarpals ^ = 1-29 for 155 specimens


    (b) metatarsals — = 1-45 for 173 specimens
    v               e

    These values express the positive skewing which is seen in Figs. 1 and 2,
where the same data are expressed in histogram form. The positive skewing
may be due to one or more of the following causes:

1 there could have been a mixed population of cows, steers and bulls in
    which the more massive bull bones may skew the curve. Application of
                                  , .       distal-breadth     100
    Howard’s6 so-called metapodial indices,                X         and
                                                length
    mid-breadth       100   . ..
                    X —     mdicates    that some bulls were present but
       length           1
    that the bulk of the material is from steers and/or cows. The sample size is
    necessarily smaller for the MB/L index as most of the metapodials cannot
    be included because they have been smashed as if for marrow extraction.
    We cannot be certain to what extent castration was practised.
2 the introduction of larger forms in order to improve stock or to provide
    draught animals.
3   because of slaughtering of a preferred class of animal as regards size, age
    or maturity. At a given age class we would expect a normal distribution
    for any single dimension, but preference for killing at a particular age
    would give a skewed distribution rising to a peak at bone dimension
      appropriate to that preferred class, e.g. veal. We cannot consider bones
      of specific age groups but can only assume that the sum total of bones
      covers the sum total of age groups at which the animals were killed. There
      were no obvious signs of any very young or very aged cattle having been
  slaughtered and these curves may reflect the preferred class for slaughter.
4 the sample of 155 metacarpals and 173 metatarsals may be atypical.

    Jewell’s' work of comparing the length or width ranges of certain bones
from various sites has been extended. The Corstopitum metacarpal length
ranges from 15-7 cm. to 20-3 cm., the distal width of the metacarpals from
4'5 t0 7'3 cm- an-d distal width of the humerus from 47 to 8-i cm. These
include specimens which are shorter and narrower than any reported from
all those sites, extending from the mesolithic to the mediaeval period, which are
listed in Appendix II, except for a single metacarpal from the Iron Age village
ot Catcote1 2 3 4 which is 0-2 cm. shorter than the smallest from Corstopitum.
    When the upper limits of the ranges of the same three dimensions are
considered the Corstopitum ranges include specimens which are longer or
wider than those described from any of the Iron Age and Romano-British
                                          The remains of cattle from Corstopitum   349




SPECIMENS



OF




NUMBER




            DISTAL   WIDTH   IN   mm



                      Fig 1 Corstopitum. Cattle metacarpal distal widths
350                    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication           HODGSON




          42-

          41 '
          40-

           39-
            36-
            37-

            36-
            35-

            34-
            33-
           32-
           31 -
                                                         127 SPECIMENS     PROM >911 REPORT
           30 -                                           23 SPECIMENS     FROM 1966 REPORT
                                                          23   SPECIMENS   FROM 1967 EXCAVATION (UNPUBLISHED)
            29 -
                                                         173   SPECIMENS   PLOTTED
           29-

            27-
                                                               1mm   INTERVALS
            26-
                                                               1 mm INTERVALS
            25-

           24 -
            23 _

            22 -                                         MEAN = SS= 4-99 cm
                                                                 N
                21 -                                     STANDARD DEVIATION = 0-547 cm

                20-

                19 -
                18 -
                17 -

                16 -
                15 -
                14 -
                13 -
                12 -

                II -
                10 -

                 9 -




 OF SPECIMENS
                 8 -
                 7 -

                 6 -
                 S -

                 4 -
                 3



 number
                 2
                  1

                 o


                       DISTAL   WIDTH   IN   mm




                                 Fig 2 Corstopitum. Cattle metatarsal distal widths.
                                      The remains of cattle from Corstopitum    351


sites cited, except for a single metacarpal from Rotherley32 which exceeds the
longest Corstopitum specimen by 0-2 cm.
  Jewell7 has commented on the gradual diminution in size of cattle from
British ancient sites from the neolithic ox, of earlier sites, to the Celtic Short¬
horn of Iron Age and Romano-British times and of the diversity of types of
cattle from Roman sites with the emergence of beasts larger than those which
commonly existed in the preceding centuries. Whether the small forms at
Corstopitum represent an unimproved stock or a diminution in size due to
domestication and the larger forms represent an improvement of the stock by
selective breeding or the importation of large draught animals, or whether the
larger size is merely residual from an ancient stock, cannot be ascertained.
It may be that the larger and smaller specimens merely represent the upper
and lower limits of a single population and that because the Corstopitum
sample is large, more of the extreme forms are found here. At the time of
writing the bones have been treated as being all Romano-British but an
attempt is being made to distinguish the different occupational levels from
which the bones are found with a view to finding how size varied during an
occupational time of several centuries1.



      Appendix I
      Statistical data referring to bones of cattle excavated at Corstopitum in
      19661 and 19672 and for those published in 19113


Cattle. Bos taurus longifrons
                                            Number     Mean Standard deviation
Metacarpals (distal width)                    155     5-38 cm.     0-539 cm
Metatarsals (distal width)                    173     4-99 cm.     0-546 cm
Tibia (distal width)                           93     5’34 cm.     0-535 cm
Radius (distal width)                          68     59 cm.       0-65 cm.
Scapula
(a) minimum width of neck                     332     475 cm.      0-49 cm.
{b) maximum “diameter” glenoid
      cavity                                  203     5-08 cm.     0-37 cm.




      Appendix II

                             Reference                                  Reference
Mesolithic                                     Matignons                  10
  Star Carr                       8            Puddle Hill                 11
Neolithic                                      Skara Brae                  12
  Maiden Castle I                9             Stonehenge                  13
352   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication       HODGSON


                             Reference                                    Reference
Neolithic                                     Catcote                         1
  Whitehawk Bay                 14            Glastonbury                    27
  Windmill Hill                 15            Little Woodbury                28
  Woodhenge                     16         Romano-British
Bronze Age                                    Caerleon                       29
  BoscombeDown                  17            Eastwood-Fawkham               30
  Castle Hill                   18            Highdole Hill                  31
  Jarlshof Sumburgh,                          Rotherley                      32
    Shetland                    19            The Rumps                       33
  Lowes Farm                    20            Woodcuts                        32
  Maiden Castle II               9            Woodyates                       32
  Minnis Bay              21               Mediaeval
  Ogbourne West Enclosure 22                  Kirkstall                       34
  Ratfyn                        23            Northolt                        34
  Skendleby                     24            Peter gate                      34
  Snail Down                    25            Pontefract                      34
Iron Age                                      Well Street                     35
   All Cannings Cross           26


      Notes
       1 I am indebted to Professor Birley of Durham University and to John
         Gillam, M.A., F.S.A., of Newcastle University for allowing me to work
         on the material excavated at Corstopitum during 1966 and 1967.


      Notes to Appendixes
       x Hodgson, G. W. I. (1967). A comparative account of faunal remains from
         some ancient sites in the North of England. M.Sc. Thesis, Durham
           University.
       2 Hodgson, G. W. I. Unpublished data on faunal remains from 1967
         excavation at Corstopitum.
       3 Meek, A. and Gray, R. A. H. (1911), in Forster, R. H. and Knowles,
         W. H. Corstopitum, Archaeologia Aeliana, 3 ser., 7, pp. 78-125.
       4 The material, identified, measured and catalogued is now stored in the
         Hancock Museum, Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
       5 Brooks, C. E. P. and Carruthers, N. (1953). Handbook of Statistical
         Methods in Meteorology. H.M.S.O. p. 42.
       6 Howard, M. M. (1963). The metrical determination of the metapodials
         and skulls of cattle, Roy. Anthropol. Inst., Occasional Paper, 18, pp. 91-100.
       7 Jewell, P. A. (1962). Changes in size and type of cattle from Prehistoric
         to Medieval Times in Britain, Z. Tierzucht. Zucht Biol., 77. pp. 159-67.
       8 Fraser, F. C. and King, J. E. (1954), in Clark, J. G. D. Star Carr.
         Cambridge, pp. 70-95.
       9 Jackson, J. W. (1943), di Wheeler, R. E. M. Maiden Castle, Dorset.
         London, pp. 360-71.
      10 Poulain-Josien, T. (1966), in Burney, C. and Case, H. Les Camps
         Neolithiaues des Matignons, Gallia Prehist., 9. Fig. 1, pp. 210-38.
                              The remains of cattle from Corstopitum      353


11 Field, N. R., Mathews, C. L. and Smith, I. F. (1964). New neolithic
   sites in Dorset and Bedfordshire (Puddlehill), Proc. Prehist. Soc., 15,
   pp. 364-6.
12 Watson, D. M. S. (1931), in Childe, V. G. Skara Brae. A Pictish Village
   in Orkney. London, pp. 198-204.
13 Jackson, J. W. (1935). The animal remains from the Stonehenge excava¬
   tions of 1920-26, Antiq. J., 15. pp. 434-40.
14 Jackson, J. W. (1934), in Curwen, E. C. Excavations in Whitehawk
   Neolithic Camp. Brighton 1932-3. Antiq. Journ., 14. pp. 127-9.
15 Jope, M. and Grigson, C. (1965), in Keiller, A. Windmill Hill and Avebury.
   Oxford, pp. 141-67.
16 Jackson, J. W. (1929), in Cunnington, M. E. Woodhenge. Devizes, pp.
   61-9.
17 Jackson, J. W. (1936), in Stone, J. F. S. An enclosure on Boscombe Down
   East, Wilts. Arch. Mag., 47. pp. 484-7.
18 Jackson, J. W. (1939). Report on the animal remains from the late Bronze
   Age site of Castle Hill, Sussex Arch. Coll., 80. pp. 267-8.
19 Platt, I. P. (1933), in Curie, A. O. Excavations at Jarlshof, Shetland,
   Proc. Soc. Antiq., Scot., 1932-3, 67 6th series, 7, pp. 127-35, and also
   1933-4, 68 6th series, 8, pp. 313—18.
20 Higgs, E. S. and Shawcross, F. W. (1961). The excavation of a Bos
   primigenius at Lowes Farm, Littleport, Proc. Camb. Ant. Soc., 54. pp. 3-16.
21 Jackson, J. W. (1943),in Worsford, F. H. Late Bronze Age Site at Minnis
   Bay, Birchington, Kent, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 9. pp. 41-4.
22 Jackson, J. W. (1942), in Piggott, C. M. Five late Bronze Age Enclosures
   in North Wilts, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 8. pp. 54-9.
23 Jackson, J. W. (1935), in Stone, J. F. S. Some discoveries at Ratfyn,
   Amesbury, Wilts. Arch. Mag., 47. pp. 66-7.
24 Jackson, J. W. (1935), in Phillips, C. W. The Excavations of the Giant
   Hills, Long Barrow, Skendleby, Lines, Archaeologia, 85. pp. 95-9.
25 Snail Down. Reported as being in preparation by Jewell, P. A. (1963).
   Cattle from British Archaeological Sites, Roy. Anthrop. Inst., Occasional
   Paper, 18. pp. 80-1.
26 Jackson, J. W. (1923), in Cunnington, M. E. The Early Iron Age Site at All
   Cannings Cross Farm, Wilts. Devizes, pp. 43-50.
27 Dawkins, W. Boyd, and Jackson, J. W. (1917), in Bulleid, A. and Gray,
   A. St. G. The Glastonbury Lake Village, Glastonbury Antiquarian Soc.
   pp. 643-72.
28 Fraser, F. C. (1948), in Brailsford, J. Excavations at Little Woodbury,
   Proc. Prehist. Soc., 14. pp. 19-23.
29 Watson, D. M. S. (1928), in Wheeler, R. E. M. and Wheeler, T. V. Report
   on the animal bones from Caerleon, Arch., 78. pp. 214-15.
30 Chaplin, R. E. and Coy, J. P. (1963), in Phillip, B. J. The Romano-
   British Farmstead at Eastwood Fawkham, Archaeologia Cantiana,
   78. pp. 70-2.
31 Jackson, J. W. (1936), in Holleyman, G. A. An early British agricultural
   village site on Highdole Hill, Tescombe, Sussex Arch. Coll., 77. pp.
   202-21.
32 Pitt-Rivers, A. (1888). Excavations at Cranbourne Chase, 1. 2, 3. London.
   (/, pp. 171-88; II, pp. 209-28; III, pp. 233-9.)
33 Chaplin, R. E. and Coy, J. P. (1964)5 in Brooks, R. T. Report of the 1963
   excavations at the Rumps, St. Minver, Cornish Arch., 3. pp. 26-34.
34 Ryder, M. L. (1961). Livestock remains from four mediaeval sites in
   Yorkshire, Agricultural Hist. Rev., 9. pp. 105-10.
35 Chaplin, R. E. (1966). The animal remains from the Well Street Site,
   Coventry, Birmingham Arch. Soc., 81. pp. 130-8.
.
      MARIA HOPF

      Plant remains and early farming in Jericho1


Excavations in the Middle East and Asia Minor since 1950 have brought
to light cereals from the Pre-Pottery settlement layers which go back to
the beginning of farming. Both barley and hulled wheats were found.
Without exception the barley belonged to the hulled two-rowed form, Hordeum
distichum, in so far as it is distinguishable—with its fragile rachis—from H.
spontaneum. Naked and multi-rowed hulled barley first occurred in the later
layers. Helbaek2 concluded that the two-rowed barley must have been the
original form, from which the multi-rowed forms arose through the mutation
of a single gene causing the lateral flowers to become fertile.
  Similar observations have been made with wheat. In Jarmo (6500 b.c.)
Helbaek3 found a hulled wheat closely related to Triticum dicoccoides as well
as T. dicoccum, and in Ali Kosh (6900 b.c.), Beidha (6500 b.c.) and Hacilar
(6500 b.c.) there was also emmer. T. monococcum occurred together with
emmer in places of equal age, though always only in small numbers, so that
it seems to have been of secondary importance. It is only absent from Beidha,
the most southerly site, which lies outside the area of distribution of wild
einkorn, T. boeoticum. There may be two reasons for these findings: either
the wild cereals were brought into cultivation in more than one place at
more or less the same time, and the crop was related to the local wild plants;
or the culture spread from a centre in the Middle East in which all three
above-named primitive forms occurred. Where the local conditions of the
secondary territory did not suit one or other of the species, as for instance at
Beidha, perhaps it died out.
  In the light of the complex questions outlined here, the observations on the
plant remains from early Jericho (Pre-Pottery to Bronze Age) are of particular
interest, for it lies in the range of distribution of H. spontaneum and T. dic¬
occoides, though T. boeoticum is absent here—at least at the present day4. The
Pre-Pottery layers here began—according to carbon-14 dating—c. 7000 b.c.
  In addition to the impressions in mud-brick—which there is not space
to discuss here—there are altogether no samples of carbonized cereal grains,
legumes and fruits, which can be divided up according to the observed
period of settlement as follows:
356    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication         hopf



                     Pre-Pot.   Pre-Pot.   Pot.    Chaleo-   Early    Early    Middle
                                   B       Neol.    lithic   Bronze   Middle   Bronze
      Species           A

% of total nos. of
                                  Q        6°/       0/      6o%               12%
  samples              4%         y 0/
                                    /o                /O               7%
                                   X        X        X         X        X       X
H. distichum            X
                                                                        X       X
H. nudum
                                   X        X                  X        X       X
T. monococcum
                                   X        X                  X        X       X
T. dicoccum             X
T. aestivum s.l.                                               X        X       X
                                                               X                X
Vitis ( pipS                                                   X                X
      \ fruits
Ficus                   x                            X         X                X
Pisum                              X                                    X       X
Lens                               X                           X        X       X
Vida cf. faba                      X                                            X
Cicer                              X?                          X        X
Avena                              X?                          X                X
Bromus                                      X                  X        X       X
Linum                                                          X
Punica                                                                          X
Phoenix                                                        X
Allium                                                         X                X
Crudferae                                   X                  X                X




   Leaving aside the few very small Bronze Age grains of naked barley (37 X
r8 X 1-4 mm.) all the finds of barley belong to the two-rowed hulled form
H. distichum. The grains are long and relatively flat (6-2 X 3-2 X 23 mm.)
and rachis segments with weak marginal hairs were repeatedly observed,
carrying the strong median florets but with the lateral florets only represented
by small weak stalks. In the Pre-Pottery A two simple rachis segments and a
total of six small grains (5-2 x 2-5 x i-8 mm.) were found, while by the
following period B the grain size had increased considerably (6-o X 3 0 x
2-3 mm.) and with c. 1200 grains there were also found rachis segments with
2 or 3 connected internodes, evidence for the cultivated form with a tough
rachis which probably did not occur in the previous phase.
   Of the hulled wheats the oldest period yielded only two single grains of
emmer, Triticum dicoccum. This species is also represented in all the later
periods by grains, rachis segments, spikelets and a number of obliquely
inserted terminal spikelets. Considerable difficulties arise in distinguishing it
from einkom, T. monococcum, which occurs regularly and abundantly from
the Pre-Pottery B level of Jericho onwards. Einkorn occurs largely in the
two-grained form; the length of the fruit does not exceed that of emmer, its
ventral side is not arched outwards, and the width of the grain usually corre¬
sponds with that of emmer. Therefore the characteristically curved embryo-
end of einkorn must serve as the distinguishing character. Furthermore,
emmer alters on carbonizing, in contrast to einkorn, so that the upper half
swells up and it becomes drop-shaped, as was found in all the settlement
phases at Jericho. No significant difference could be detected in the width
of the rachis segments of einkorn and emmer. Typical grains of naked wheat.
                               Plant remains and early farming in Jericho     357

T. aestivum s.l., with short straight rounded scutellum, occur from the Early
Bronze Age, while a piece of a strong twisted awn in the Pre-Pottery A, and
subsequently also a fruit in the Early Bronze Age, indicate the presence of
(? wild) oats, Avena sp.
  The roundish horse-bean, Vida cf. faba, resembles those shown by
Feinbrunn5 (see below); with a mean diameter of 5-3 mm. it is only a
little larger than the largest peas, Pisum cf. sativum (min. 3-0, max. 5-5 mm.).
The size of the palisade cells and stalk cells in their testa makes it possible to
refer material to Vicia with safety. The lentils, Lens culinaris, have a diameter
of 3-0 mm., smaller than the Bronze Age examples described by Feinbrunn6
from Beth-Shean and by Helbaek7 from Lachish.
  Chickpea, Cicer arietinum, occurred in great quantities in the Early Bronze
Age; fragments without shells, from the Pre-Pottery B, could also belong
here.
  Carbonized fig-pips. Ficus cf. carica, could be detected in many samples
after the first settlement; only once was any of the flesh of the fruit found.
In addition to the innumerable pips of the vine, Vitis vinifera, with their
short, clearly thickened stalk, many carbonized berries also occurred, mostly
containing 2-4 pips. It is a moot point whether the shape of the pips or the
number in each berry are indicative of the primitive state. On the other hand,
a cultivated form certainly appeared at tire same time in flax, Linum usitatis-
simum; in addition to seeds (4-2 x 1-9 mm.), separate carpels and a complete
capsule (6-2 x 5-5 mm.) were found. It is only dehiscent at the very tip, along
the suture of a carpel; the wild form usually bursts open in the middle of the
carpel as well. Kenyon8 reported the occurrence of fragments of wall of
pomegranate, Punica granatum, and in support of this were found pips (3-8 X
2-0 mm.) which are considerably smaller than those of modem varieties on
the market today. The only date-stone, Phoenix dactylifera, from the Early
Bronze Age measured 1275 X 675 mm. The “onions” are long and slender,
and could originate from Allium cf. ampeloprasum. The occurrence of weeds
is very slight, from which it is evident that only threshed and winnowed
harvest products are present at the actual centres of settlement; the waste
material will have been left behind at the threshing place.
 From Phase A only 6 barley grains, 2 grains of emmer, 46 fig pips, and
3 broken pieces (at least 3-5 mm. long) of a legume were found, so it is doubt¬
ful whether this represents the complete stock of the earliest fruit, nuts and
cultivated plants from Jericho, and one does not know whether einkorn
and several species of legumes in the Pre-Pottery B are to be looked upon
as additional new species or whether they are old forms which have only not
been recovered previously. The full Neolithic, in spite of technical progress
(pottery), surprisingly shows a remarkable paucity of species, which in turn
is even more conspicuous in the Chalcolithic. There is a complete change
in the Early Bronze Age, in which, in addition to the species already known
from the Pre-Pottery B, no less than six new records were produced: Triticum
358   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     hopf


aestivum, Vitis, Linum, Phoenix, Allium and Cicer (if Cicer were not already
present in Pre-Pottery B). Neither of the following periods show any further
new introductions (apart from Punka). The reappearance in the Middle
Bronze Age of beans with a somewhat larger seed (5-6 mm.) than in the Pre-
Pottery B (5-2 mm.) could indicate equally either a reintroduction or a
continuation of its use.
  If one considers the wild plants occurring in the nearby or more remote
surroundings of the settlement9, the finds in general indicate they did not
originate from the native flora. For instance, Triticum boeoticum is absent in
Palestine. If einkorn should actually first occur in the Pre-Pottery B (c. 6250
b.c.) in Jericho,   the destroyers of the tower and the builders of the third
and fourth walls must at least have invaded through the area of distribution of
wild einkorn which lies to the north, whilst the tower builders of Phase A
(c. 6800 B.c.) had at their disposal in the countryside wild barley and wild
emmer for domestication and the fig for gathering.
  The newly arrived potters of the first half of the fifth millennium do not
seem to have practised intensive farming; the plant remains therefore give
no clue to the origin of these inhabitants. Among the plants of the Early
Bronze Age (from 3200 B.C.) on the other hand, vine (in 28 samples!) and a
single grain of naked wheat indicate connections with the north or north¬
east, whilst Linum, Cicer, Phoenix and Allium do not need to be of foreign
origin. However, the flax capsule must be considered to have a shape modified
by cultivation, so these other plants or at least their products, though they
have not previously appeared in the tell, could also have been a valued
commodity of the newcomers.
  On the basis of the finds described, cultivation in Jericho during the Pre-
Pottery A phase could possibly be traced to the taking into cultivation of
native wild plants. In phase B an alien northern element shows itself in
Triticum monococcum, but whether it actually occurred earlier could not be
determined with certainty because of the small amount of material found.
For this reason the hypothesis of a local development of farming is weak,
although the fragility of the Hordeum rachis is also evidence of an early stage
of domestication; this characteristic could nevertheless be related to the
invasion of a local wild barley into an already highly developed system of
field crops.



      Notes
       1 cf. Kenyon, K. M. (i960). Excavations at Jericho, 1. Palestine Exploration
         Society, London; Kenyon, K. M. (1965). Excavations at Jericho, 2.
         1 alestme Exploration Society, London.
       2 lle^.ae^5    (x966). Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and
         Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20. pp. 350-60.
       3 Helbaek, H. (1966). Pre-Pottery neolithic farming at Beidha, Palestine
         Exploration Quarterly, 98, pp. 61-6.
                              Plant remains and early farming in Jericho      359


     4 Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheat and barley, Science, 153,
       pp. 1074-9.
     5 Feinbrunn, N. (1938). New data on some cultivated plants and weeds of
       the early bronze age in Palestine, Palestine J. Bot.,J. Ser., I, pp. 238-40.
     6 Feinbrunn, N. (1938). ibid.
     7 Helbaek, H. (1958). Plant economy in ancient Lachish, in Tufnell, O.
       (1958). Lachish IV. London, pp. 309-17.
     8 Kenyon, K. M. (i960), op. cit. pi. XVII.
     9 Zohary, M. (1962). Plant Life of Palestine. New York.




13—dopaa   *   *
      CHARLES A. REED

       The pattern of animal domestication in the
      prehistoric Near East

Agriculture, which includes animal domestication, is a part of the long
history of human cultural adaptation whereby man, probably more by trial
and error than purposeful forethought, achieved increasing control of his
environment. Viewed in this light, the cultivated plants and domestic animals
are as much artifacts of human culture as was an Olduwan pebble tool or is
any modern tool; each of these was wrought from nature by man and allows
him to divert more of the energy in his ecosystem to his own purposes.
Through the increase of foodstuffs after the beginning of the Agricultural
(Neolithic or Food-Producing) Revolution, the human species has incredibly
multiplied its own population at the expense of the rest of the world’s
biota.
  Archaeological and natural-historical evidences combine to place this
earliest agriculture in the lower hills and adjacent plains of the area east of the
Mediterranean into south-western Iran. Here grew the wild emmer and ein-
korn wheats and the wild two-rowed barley1 first cultivated and here occurred
also the wild mammals—wolf, goat, sheep, pig and cattle—which were the
earliest domesticants. Here too—in the Levant, in southern Turkey, and
along the western edges of the Zagros ranges—the earliest evidences of
agriculture, including the bones of the first domesticants, are being recovered
by archaeologists. We must not, of course, overlook the possibilities that
other men in many places may have been doing similar things. There is for
instance the report of independent domestication of sheep in Dobrogea,
Rumania2, at about the same time this process was happening in the foothills
of the Zagros Mts.
   For more than 99% of their co-existence, man and other animals came
together as hunter and prey, man more often being the hunter. The change to
man the domesticator was thus a major behavioural shift in human adaptation
for the utilization of animal resources. In analysing this basic change in the
man-animal situation, the relations between four possible variables must be
considered: 1 the evolving morphology, intelligence, and innate behaviour
of the animals; 2 the evolving morphology, intelligence, and innate behaviour
362   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     reed


of the particular men involved; 3 pertinent changes in the environment; 4
changes in human culture.
  The first two of these potential variables can be discounted. The plants and
animals did not together evolve to a stage of potential domesticability; indeed,
they undoubtedly could have been cultivated and/or domesticated for several
millions of years before they were. Man had been modem in form and
behaviour, in so far as can be determined, for some 25,000 years before
domestication occurred. However, in the area involved and at the time (some
11,000 years ago) of the earliest evidences of the intensive use of cereal grains,
a use which presumably preceded the beginnings of agriculture, both the
physical environment and human culture were changing rapidly, the cultural
innovations probably occurring in correlation with a marked climatic shift
from colder to warmer.
  The Wurm-Weichselian-Wisconsin period of world-wide temperature
depression, producing massive continental glaciers in the nearer polar regions
of both northern and southern hemispheres, had run its course. The Taurus-
Zagros Mts. of the Near East had been heavily glaciated3, but by 12,000
years ago these glaciers were melting back toward their highland sources.
While the climate on the plateaux inland from the mountains remained some¬
what cool and dry for another 6000 years4, indicating the relative slowness
of the change from the ice-age to a climate typical of the present, man in the
Near East began moving out of caves and living more in open sites after some
12,000 years ago.
  Human culture, as we know it from the recovered remnants of the tools
(mostly stone but occasionally of bone), was changing rapidly; the blades,
burins and scrapers which had dominated the Near Eastern tool kit for the
major portion of the Upper Palaeolithic were being supplanted in part by
microlithic tools, often of such preciseness of shape as to be termed “geo¬
metries ’. These microliths are usually so small that they must have been
hafted to have been used, and their variety and popularity presumably indicate
an increased use of available perishable materials—wood, skins, hair, horn,
and perhaps vegetable foodstuffs.
  We do not know the full story, but we do know that within a period
generally falling between eleven and ten thousand years ago, after approxi¬
mately a thousand years of the intensive use of microliths, men were settling
into semi-permanent villages. We find these present as part of the Natufian
culture5 of the Levant (best exemplified at the site of Mallaha6 on the edge of
Lake Hulah in Palestine s Jordan Valley), at Zawi Chemi Shanidar7 beside
the Greater Zab (a branch of the Tigris) in northern Iraq, and even on the
cold-steppe of the Iranian Plateau at the site of Ganj-Dareh Tepe8.
   All of these near-contemporaneous sites indicate permanent occupation,
and all have some degree of house-building, although the type of structure
is difficult to detect at Zawi Chemi. The Natufian sites and Zawi Chemi have
mortars and pestles and/or querns and hand-held milling stones; at Ganj-
                                 Animal domestication in the Near East    363


Dereh some broken stone was found which may be pieces of querns. The
Natufian sites and Zawi Chemi had sickles (or at least sickle blades) and
microliths; these were not found at Ganj-Dareh. Nowhere had pottery been
made or metal yet utilized.
  In so far as the evidence has been recovered, the Natufian people of the
Levant had the more complex culture, but had no domestic animals9, whereas
the simpler people of Zawi Chemi did. These latter had domestic sheep10.
  The time has come to pause, take stock, and ask ourselves some questions.

1 South-western Asia, although still colder than it is at present, was in a
  period of more rapid warming than had been that of the prior few thousand
  years. Indeed, so rapid was the world-wide climatic warming that the conti¬
  nental glaciers were melting back at such an increased rate that modern
  scientists designate 11,000 b.p.11 (Before Present) as being approximately
  the end of the “ice-age” (Pleistocene) and the beginning of the post-
  Pleistocene (Recent). Studies of pollen, particularly, and of other remains
  from bottom-cores at Lake Zeribar in the Iranian Zagros12 show that
  south-western Asia shared in this world-wide change of climate during and
  following the end of the Pleistocene. Warming is noticeable by about
  14,000 b.p.; particularly for the Zagros at approximately 11,000 b.p., trees
  (primarily oak and pistachio) were beginning to re-invade the foothills, an
  area from which they had been eradicated during the cold of the terminal
  glacial period.

  Questions:

(a) Did this period of climatic change influence and/or accelerate human
   cultural evolution toward the microlithic type of tool production, or did
   the pattern of cultural change have such inherent tendencies as to be
   relatively independent of environmental shifts, so that the microlithic
   phase would have occurred in south-western Asia when it did even if the
    climatic change had not been accelerated ?13
(jb) Was the introduction of microlithic tools merely accompanied by, or
    perhaps directly associated with, a more intensive utilization of the
    available food resources, particularly the seeds of certain grasses (wild
    barley and wheats) ? We have no evidence to answer directly, but the
   introduction of sickles and milling stones in south-western Asia within
    the subsequent few hundred years would suggest some period of use of
    these nutritious grains prior to the invention of specialized tools for
    reaping and milling them.

2 From the Kom Ombo plain of Upper Egypt we have milling stones
  (handstones) and oval or irregular-shaped, slightly concave querns which
  were in use there by or before 13,000 b.p.14 Indeed, the preparation of
  vegetable foods by the use of pounding and grinding stones seems to have
  had a long history in Africa15, and such practices may have already begun
364    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   reed


  some two million years ago, on the evidence of hammer-stones found at
  Makapansgat in Transvaal16. While there is generally little evidence for
  cultural contact between Egypt and the Asiatic Levant in the Late
  Palaeolithic, this priority of typical querns and hand-stones in Egypt by at
  least two thousand years is intriguing.

  Questions:

(a) If milling stones were introduced from Africa, do we need to think of that
      introduction as being correlated with a period of rapid climatic change ?
      Or, possibly, did both the culture and the environment in south-western
      Asia favour utilization by the end of the Pleistocene of milling stones,
    whether introduced or home invented ?
(b) Is the preparation of vegetable food on grinding stones in any way asso¬
      ciated with the first domestication of the hoofed mammals ? If it is, other
      factors are also present, as such domestication did not occur amongst the
      Natufians or, until millennia later, among the Egyptians or Nubians.

  The symbiotic association of a primate species, man, with other mammalian
species, his domesticants, is a part of evolutionary history, and contemplation
of the biological factors which allowed or influenced that history is as neces¬
sary as is consideration of the environmental and cultural factors.
  The earliest domesticants were mammals of the Orders Carnivora (dogs)
or Artiodactyla (pigs, sheep, goats, cattle). The last three of these five are
ruminants from one family, the Bovidae. Each of the five and each wild
ancestor had in common a well-developed intra-specific social fife17, which
has undoubtedly been of aid in their adjustments to living with members of
another species. Two of them, dog and pig, have the ability to eat a wide
variety of plant and animal materials, including offal and carrion: the bovids,
in company with all ruminants, consume materials such as leaves or grass not
directly available as food to man.
  Of the wild ancestors, the cattle (Bos primigenius) are extinct and so not
available for experimentation. The other four, however, are readily tamed if
caught when young and treated with consideration; wolves and dogs inter¬
breed readily and produce fertile offspring, as do wild and domestic pigs. I
have no data on the breeding of domestic and wild goats, but would expect
them to do so, in as much as their physical similarities are such that we include
them in the same species, Capra hircus. Similarly I would expect that any
Old World sheep, all of which are now often put in the single species Ovis
ammon, would mate successfully with any domestic sheep.
   Judging from evidence of the bones exhumed from early prehistoric
village-farming sites in the Near East, the dog was seemingly never an
important factor in the economy, and the domestic pig was presumably only
sligbdy more important; at least the bones of these two domesticants are
rare in comparison with those of sheep and goat. Indeed, in many sites, bones
                                    Animal domestication in the Near East   365


 of gazelles outnumber those of pigs. The possibility remains of course that
 the gazelles were tamed and kept in herds, to be killed as needed, but we have
 no evidence of this.
   The failure of any vertebrate to have evolved an enzyme or enzymes to
 digest cellulose remains an enigma in the study of biochemical evolution.
 This failure, however, has meant that cellulose, one of the most common
organic materials in the terrestrial world, has been denied to all vertebrate
herbivores as a direct source of energy. Only by evolving internal fermenta¬
tion vats, often quite complex in structure and function, can a mammal
utilize cellulose; in such vats, anaerobic bacteria (aided in some instances
by certain Protozoa) process the ingested food and break down the cellulose
to simpler molecules which are then available to the mammal’s digestive
system.
   The most efficient of such fermentation-vats are those which have evolved
anterior to the intestine, by modification of the stomach or of the stomach
plus adjacent parts of the oesophagus ; of these the ruminants (camels, deer,
giraffes, bovids) are the best known, but others (hippopotamus, kangaroos,
and possibly some rodents and primates) have independently evolved similar
anatomical and physiological specializations18, but without rumination.
   Cud-chewing, thus, is not the important factor in cellulose utilization,
but seemingly is an auxiliary device, evolved in the ruminants, which increases
the efficiency of the fermentation-vat. Some other mammals (the horse and
other perissodactyls, pigs, rabbits, and many rodents) have evolved a fer-
mentation-vat in the caecum, posterior to the small intestine. This relatively
inefficient arrangement may well be a factor in the gradual near-replacement
since the Oligocene of Perissodactyia and Suina by ruminants.
  A secondary advantage to having a fermentation-vat anterior to the true
stomach, known to be true at least for ruminants, is that urea can be secreted
from the blood into the stomach, thus recycling the body’s nitrogen, with the
result that the animal can survive on low-nitrogen fodder. Another advantage
is that the bacteria produce all tire necessary vitamins, except A and D, a
situation which again allows the animals to survive on what would generally
be regarded as a sub-minimal diet.
  Two concepts, one merely of interest but the other of value to our thinking,
emerge from the above considerations of ruminant physiology. The first is
that, while the ruminants eat roughage (grass, leaves, etc.) they do not live
directly from this ingested material; for the most part the micro-organisms in
tne internal fermentation-vat consume that food, but the ruminant lives then
on the by-products of bacterial metabolism and on the surplus population
of the micro-organisms. A thought more valuable to the solution of problems
concerning the beginnings of domestication is that ruminants were, by the
very nature of their anatomical and physiological organization, pre-adapted
to survive on food high in cellulose, which is not directly available to man or
dog, and can be utilized only inefficiently by pigs.
366     Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   REED


  Dog, man, and pig are, however, direct competitors for food; even wolves,
ancestors of dogs are (in common with many of the Canidae), much more
omnivorous than many people realize. It is true that pigs and dogs in pre¬
historic times, as well as today, might seek out food (earthworms, acorns,
bulbs for pigs; carrion, camp scraps for dogs) not ordinarily eaten by man,
but none of these food items was impossible for man to eat, and many of them
were sometimes eaten by him. Particularly under conditions of scarcity was
man in direct competition with two of his early domesticants and might even
rob the dog of its wild prey. Furthermore, man would derive more energy
from direct consumption of such food than he would by diverting it to pig
or dog and then eating them. Only in a community where there is an excess
of human food can pigs and dogs be tolerated as a part of the biosocial
community. Thus to cycle grain through a pig before consumption by man
is to lose more than three-fourths of the potential energy originally present
in the grain19, although man may gain to a lesser degree by the concentration
of the protein and by the aesthetic pleasure derived from eating meat.
  With early man’s bovid domesticants there was typically no necessity,
and in practice little possibility, of competition for food. Zeuner20 has termed
these animals the “crop-robbers”, and that they undoubtedly were when wild,
but once under human control they could be kept away from the fields until
after the harvest. The basic point is that ruminants in general and sheep,
goats and cattle in particular (to limit our discussion to the prehistoric Near
East) eat materials such as dry grass, leaves, straw, twigs, etc., with green
fodder when available, which would be a starvation diet for man, dog, or pig.
The domestic bovid (as well as domestic camels and reindeer, later in time)
is thus a converter of cellulose-rich materials, otherwise unavailable to man,
into carbohydrates, fats, and proteins by way of milk and flesh, and is also a
converter of those same materials, generally useless otherwise, into such
valuable commodities as hides, hair, and wool. In time, the dung, particularly
of cattle, also came to be utilized, both as fuel for humans and as a fertilizer
for the fields.
      In summary, the ability to survive on a diet high in cellulose and low in
 proteins is a pre-adaptive factor in the successful domestication of bovids
 by early villagers and later of camels and reindeer by nomads. (The same
 primary adaptations, too, are of course present in those camelids, llama and
 alpaca, which were later and independently domesticated in South America.)
 These factors, i a multi-chambered “stomach” with a fermentation-vat
 anterior to the functional digestive tract; 2 rumination; and 3 recycling of
 nitrogen from urea, in correlation with the various anatomical similarities
 and the evidence of the fossil record, indicate to me a common ancestry for
 the Ruminantia (including the camels) by the middle of the Eocene or ear her.
 Thus the beginnings of the physiological adaptations which allowed sheep,
 goats, and cattle to survive under conditions of probably minimum diet and
                                  Animal domestication in the Near East     367


poor care in early Recent villages had had their evolutionary origins, in
however preliminary form, some fifty million years earlier.
  Undoubtedly the ruminants’ neural and endocrine adaptations for sociabil¬
ity, and their anatomical and physiological adaptations for high cellulose
and low protein diet, had been perfected for millions of years prior to the
evolution of any anthropoid biped identifiable as Homo; why then were no
ruminants—or the omnivorous pigs or the semi-omnivorous wolves for that
matter—not domesticated earlier in human prehistory ?
  The animals were obviously ready, but man was not. Since by the time
we are considering, c. 12,000 to 11,000 years ago, modern man had been the
only type present for some 25,000 years, the changes in men necessary to
bring them to a state of readiness to domesticate animals must have been
primarily cultural. Some factor had to tip the balance of behaviour to change
them from hunters of wild animals to keepers and defenders of tame ones.
  We cannot prove that relatively rapid climatic change was a direct or
indirect factor in the origin of cultivation and domestication, but the environ¬
mental change may indeed have been an important even if indirect influence.
Climatic warming certainly meant a slow but continuous shift of vegetational
zones upward on hill and mountain, and a correlated slow movement of animal
populations to maintain themselves in the environments in which they could
exist. These biological changes, depending upon end-of-Pleistocene warming,
may well have stimulated cultural innovations in south-western Asia, quite a 9
did floral and faunal changes in Europe at this same time. We know that in the
Near East, within a period of little more than a thousand years, microliths
were invented or introduced, people began to move out of caves and build
villages of various types, people began reaping and milling wild cereals, people
began cultivating cereals, and animals became domesticated. (Not all of these
events necessarily occurred in the order designated, as the sequence was
different in some places and some events occurred simultaneously.)          -—
  I believe that, on the basis of present evidence, a primary requirement for
the earliest domestication of the ruminants, and for pigs, is that man settled
down to village fife. A necessity for village life is an established food source
for man, which, by the invariable association of early villages with milling
stones, would mean dependence upon cereal grain, acorns, or some such
highly nutritious plant food which could be gathered in quantity, fragmented
or powdered, dried if need be, and stored.12
   I believe that the archaeological record, although incomplete as yet, is in
preliminary agreement with the above proposition, but many sites in different
environmental areas, from the Jordan’s mouth to the plateaux of Iran and
Anatolia, will have to be dug meticulously and have their discoveries analysed
carefully to test the hypothesis.
  Villages with housing and milling stones do not necessarily have to have
had cultivated grains and/or domesticated animals. Mallaha and other
Natufian settlements seemingly did not, nor did the sites of Mureybat and
368    Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   reed


Bouqras, on the Euphrates in northern and eastern Syria, respectively22.
At Mureybat, seventeen occupation levels, dated between 10,200 B.P. and
9500 b.p., succeeded each other; at Bouqras the early level is thought to be
coincident with the PPNA settlement at Jericho and the village persisted late
enough to have coarse, unpainted pottery. The C-14 determinations are
8240 ± 100 to 7840 ± 60. The villages seemingly maintained themselves
completely by hunting and gathering, with some evidence for animal hus¬
bandry at Bouqras at the very end of its existence.
  Palestine remains an enigma in this early history of animal domestication.
The problem has been discussed particularly by Perrot23 and by Ducos24.
The basic fact remains, after considerable investigation, that cereal cultivation
and animal domestication cannot be demonstrated for much of Palestine
(particularly the upper Jordan Valley) and southern Syria prior to the late
fifth millennium B.c. Between c. 8000 b.p. and perhaps c. 6500 b.p., an occupa¬
tional hiatus of fifteen htmdred years seemingly exists, as if Palestine had been
deserted. Perrot suggests a period of desiccation, to correlate in part with the
Boreal Period of Europe (c. 9500-7600 B.P.). However, the chronological
synchrony is not close, and one suspects that the extremes of environmental
change necessary to have caused such human desertion cannot have occurred;
even if the population abandoned their villages for the most part, and
abandoned Jericho also (as seems to have happened), Palestine must have
been occupied, and I suggest occupied by people who had some domestic
mammals even if only goats or goats and sheep. We must remember that,
prior to this supposed cultural hiatus, and in the millennium between 9000 and
8000 b.p., Beidha (at the southern end of the Dead Sea drainage) had culti¬
vated barley25 and probably also had domestic goats26 at the same time. The
people of Jericho, later in the same millennium, seem definitely to have had
cultivated barley2' and perhaps reared domestic goats28; the evidence on this
latter point is being re-evaluated by Clutton-Brock and we must delay any
decision until her results are known. However, in that same millennium,
domestic goats have been reported from El Khiam29, a site in the Wadi
Khareitoun between Bethlehem and the Dead Sea. With goats and barley
known from the lower part of the drainage of the Dead Sea after 9000 b.p.,
and cuJtivated wheat at Jericho c. 8000 b.p.30, I cannot believe that cultivation
and domestication were absent from Palestine until 6500 b.p. The evidence
must exist, yet to be found in spite of the lack of success of careful search
already made for it.



       Summaries of individual species

In my previous reviews on prehistoric domestication in the ancient Near
East    I tried to weigh the evidence as then existing, and decided that many
prior statements on the subject could not be accepted. The result was that the
                                    Animal domestication in the Near East     369


earliest known representatives of each of the domesticants in many areas
were necessarily put at a time obviously some thousands of years later than
that domestication had occurred. I believe that the resulting practice, of
demanding proof of domestication before accepting claim for it as valid, was a
healthy one, and the intervening decade has seen numerous workers who have
helped to fill the chronological voids I had left.
  The dog (Canis familiaris): An increasing number of behavioural studies
confirm the relationship between dog and wolf, as based on morphological
similarities, while at the same time excluding the jackal or any other canid
from the dog’s ancestry. Many of these studies of behaviour are included in a
recent issue of the American Zoologist (May 1967) devoted to the subject. A
few points are worth discussing.
  Several authors32 separately considered various aspects of the evolution of
canid behaviour in general or that of wolf and dog in particular. Although
their work was independent, a general consensus emerges that the behaviour
of wolf and dog differs from that of other members of the family primarily
in the possession of adaptations to increase sociability and decrease friction,
competition, and fighting in the group. My own further conclusion is that
•such behaviour can only have evolved in the free-living pack-life of the wolf,
to be then inherited and largely retained by the domestic dog throughout that
animal’s relatively short span of existence since first domesticated.
  The rearing of tame wolves is not new, but Woolpy and Ginsberg33 have
analysed the problem by experiments. Before six weeks of age, wolf pups
show no fear of man, and indeed are usually all friendliness, with much tail-
wagging, nosing, licking, and exploratory play-biting34. After six or seven
weeks of age, taming becomes increasingly difficult, although seemingly a
wolf of any age can be “socialized” to accept man as a comrade if one has
the time and patience. The important aspect which emerges from these
experiments, and from the description of the rearing of a wolf-pup to
socialized adulthood35, is that pups acquired prior to six weeks of age and
hand-reared would behave toward man much as a large dog does.
  There are some few behavioural patterns of adult tamed wolves not found
in dogs, but the latter of course have been subjected to artificial selection, and
at least one action selected against may well have been the affectionate
muzzle-bite greeting of the tamed wolf36. Additionally, Scott31 made the im¬
portant suggestion that selection in the dog has been “for a highly protected
neonatal existence”, which I translate to mean the retention of the trustful
and friendly behaviour of the wolf pup. (Different breeds of dogs vary of
course, due to special selection in each, and individual training and experience
is another variable.) Certainly the experiment with Elsa the lioness shows how
much of the wildness of a large social carnivore can be lost in one generation
when the individual is hand-reared by humans38.
 Prehistoric experiments of raising wolf pups may have been tried dozens or
hundreds of times before a breeding population was established which
370   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    reed

remained in the human environment, but there would seem now no difficulty
in believing in the feasibility of this process of domestication of dog from
wolf.
   Fentress39 made the concluding statement that dogs were not derived from
wolves that exist today, but that primitive man domesticated his first dogs
from a common ancestor. This statement will appeal to, and be repeated by,
dog-lovers and people in dog-clubs, who have an emotional bias against
accepting the living wolf as typical of the ancestor of their pets, but in
actuality the population (or populations) of Old World wolves from which
dogs were derived some 11,000 or more years ago were probably little
different, except possibly by slightly larger size, than are the wolves of those
same regions today.
   Scott suggested that dogs may have been domesticated only once, since the
up-curved tail or the curly tail held over the back is characteristic of all dogs
but not of wolves. He proposed that the mutation occurred early in the
history of dogs and was retained by artificial selection. A common ancestry
of all dogs would necessarily be an ancient one in the history of domestication,
to have dogs at Star Carr in England by approximately 9500 years ago40, in
Anatolia419000 years ago, and in Idaho by 10,400 b.p.42 There remains work
to be done, but the major outlines of the domestication of the dog do seem
to be more discernable through the mists of antiquity than was true a few
years ago.
   For south-western Asia, I had previously43 indicated doubt concerning
proof of the presence of domestic dogs until a relatively late date. The prob¬
lem now is happily being clarified by the discovery of dogs at £ayonii44 in
south-western Anatolia, a site dated at c. 9000 b.p.45 Further examination, by
Miss Lawrence and myself, of the remains of the large canids from Jarmo,
about which I was puzzled previously46 reveals that they too undoubtedly
represent dogs and not wolves.
   Zeuner47 had published on the presence of dogs at Jericho from the lower
levels of the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B period (c. 8300 ? b.p. as I extrapolate
the radiocarbon determinations there). With the evidence of earlier dogs
already in south-western Asia, their presence in the PPNB levels, and even in
the earlier PPNA, would seem reasonable. However, Clutton-Brock48 has
re-examined the canid material from Jericho and has not been able to certify
that any of the bones or teeth are definitely from dogs and not from the local
wolf. Obviously, we need more material, which need demands more excava¬
tion.
   The fact remains that bones of dogs from prehistoric villages in south¬
western Asia are generally rare, but we now must realize that such rarity does
not necessarily preclude the presence of dogs in those same villages. Probably
dogs were not eaten, and possibly dead dogs were not allowed to lie in the
village, so few of their bones are preserved for us.
   Possibly the earliest drawing of a dog is that represented in a hunting scene
                                   Animal domestication in the Near East     371

from level III (c. 7500 b.p.) at £atal Huyiik49 in south-central Anatolia. The
“dog” however would probably not have been recognized as such if out of the
context of the scene of a man hunting deer, as the actual figure of the small
carnivore could as easily be that of a mustelid or viverrid.
  The pig (Sus scrofa): No emotional problems arise in accepting the wild
pig as the ancestor of the domestic pig, nor do we find international symposia
convened to discourse on the comparative behaviour of wild and domestic
pigs, and on the problems in taming the former. I can, however, report that
the striped young of the wild pig, two of which I kept for several weeks at
Jarmo in 1955, behave exactly as do the unstriped young of domestic pigs,
and they smell the same, too.
  Stampfli50 has given a good resume of the prehistoric domestication of the
pig in south-western Asia, which need not be repeated here since his studies
will be published. He found that pigs, prior to the period of Sumerian cities,
were found at numerous sites but rarely represented more than 5% of the
bones of food animals; they were however more numerous (25%) at Matarrah.
  Stampfli verified the unpublished work of Flannery51 that remains of only
wild pigs were recovered from the lower, pre-ceramic levels at Jarmo, and that
there had been a transition to smaller domestic pigs (with some large pre¬
sumably hunted pigs still remaining) in those upper layers with pottery. The
implication, thus, is that domestication of the pig was a process happening at
Jarmo c. 8500 b.p., but not a process necessarily limited to that site. Actually,
domestic pigs were already present, although a minor part of the village fauna,
at Qayonii, several hundreds of years earlier in south-western Anatolia52.
These latter are the earliest domestic pigs known, but we should not thereby
imagine that they necessarily will retain that distinction. However, if settled
villages were a prerequisite for domestication of artiodactyls, pigs at Qayonii
may be close in time to that period of origin.
  The sheep (Ovis aries) and the goat (Capra hircus): The sheep identified
by Perkins53 remain the earliest-known domestic animals, perhaps in correla¬
tion with the fact that the site, Zawi Chemi, is one of the earliest definite
villages (c. 10,800 b.p.). Domestic sheep are now known also from £ayonii,
c. 9000 b.p.54 However, to illustrate the continuing problems of identification
of broken pieces of bones of Caprinae as recovered from prehistoric sites,
Stampfli55 could not be certain that any of the sheep bones found at Jarmo
were from domestic sheep, although he thinks they probably were. In any
case, goats seemingly were much more important than sheep at Jarmo,
outnumbering them by a wide margin.
  The time of introduction of domestic animals into Africa has long been a
gnawing problem, but recently Higgs56 has presented some definite evidence
from the upper (neolithic) levels of the cave of Haua Ftea in Cyrenaica,
Libya. Again, in illustration of the difficulties inherent in zoo-archaeology,
the butchering practices of the neolithic people seem to have resulted in
their discarding outside the cave the taxonomically diagnostic bones, so that
372   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   reed

Higgs was unable to distinguish sheep from goats57. (His problem was further
complicated by the presence in the same deposits of the closely-related wild
audad or “Barbary Sheep”, Ammotragus.) However, he definitely stated that
domestic sheep or goats or both were living in Cyrenaica before c. 6800 B.P.,
and possibly as early as 8400 b.p. Since both domestic sheep and goats were
well known in south-western Asia by this earlier time, and goats presumably
this early or earlier were at Beidha58 in the southern end of the Dead Sea
drainage, there would seem to be little difficulty in accepting the probability
that domestic goats and/or sheep could have been herded by easy stages
across Sinai (not such a desert then, certainly, as it is now, and not such a
desert now as many believe59) and the northern coast of Egypt into the
mountains of Cyrenaica. They could also have been moved up the Nile
valley and into the oasis of Fayum, but we have no evidence of their presence
in these areas until later.
   The earliest history of domestic goats in south-western Asia is not much
more clear than when I wrote on the subject ten years ago. They are the
dominant food animal at Jarmo60, and are listed as being abundant in the
earliest or Bus Mordeh phase at Tepe Ah Kosh, Deh Luran, Iranian Khuzis-
tan, where their identification as domesticants is based on the high proportion
of yearlings there61. Since the lower levels of this site may date well before
9000 b.p., these domestic goats, already outside the area of their natural range
in the mountains, may represent the earliest record yet known. Tepe Ali Kosh
is one site where domestic goats would definitely seem to precede sheep, as
the latter are reported only as possibly present in the second phase at the
site, but then become more numerous later, as indeed also do the goats.
  Lawrence cannot be certain that domestic goats were present at (^ayonii,
c. 9000 B.P., but their wide-spread distribution within a relatively short time
after, from Beidha62 (where there are no native true goats) to Khuzistan63
would imply the beginnings of their domestication at least by 9000 b.p., if
not earlier.
  Domestic goats, but not sheep, were reported from the levels of Pre-
Pottery Neolithic B at Jericho64, but on limited evidence. While I had pre¬
viously accepted this as a valid record, I am happy that Clutton-Brock is
now making a thorough study of all the bones from Jericho, and hopefully
we shall soon have available the results of her investigations. The bones
from numerous other sites in south-western Asia also await study, or have
been studied but the results not yet published. Some of these studies may
change the pattern as here presented for the prehistoric chronology of domestic
sheep and goats, and for other species also.
  Cattle (Bos taurus): Accumulating evidence indicates that cattle were the
last of the lour major food-animals of the prehistoric Near East to have been
domesticated. Indeed, the earliest known cattle for which we have clear
evidence ol domestication, c. 8500 b.p., were not in south-western Asia;
they were Irom the site of Argissa-Maghula, in Greek Thessaly65. The next
                                    Animal domestication in the Near East      373


oldest site for what seem to be domestic cattie is also in Greece, only a rela¬
tively short distance from the first, at Nea Nikomedeia, in Macedonia66. The
date here is c. 8100 b.p. We do not know whether cattle were first domesticated
in south-eastern Europe and then moved as domesticants to Asia, or whether
the pattern was in the reverse direction and we have not found the early sites
in Asia as yet, or whether independent centres of domestication of cattle
occurred, sparked perhaps by people who travelled in trade and saw what
others were doing.
  Possibly there was more of an act of purposeful domestication in bringing
cattle into the villages than there had been with the earlier domesticants.
After some 2000 years of increasingly intense domestication of sheep and
goats particularly, the thought may have occurred that the big wild cattle,
hunted only occasionally I would say, from the record of the sparsity of their
bones in most village sites of the period, might be worth taming and keeping.
I know of no way of proving or disproving such a supposition.
  Isaac67, following the pioneer ideas of Eduard Hahn in the late nineteenth
century, has argued that domestication of cattle emerged from religious
practices based on awe, fear, and admiration of the great bulls, which some¬
times stood two metres at the withers. He has proposed that cattle might have
been driven into large enclosures, from which certain males were isolated
for sacrifice as occasion demanded, but leaving others free to breed. Gradually
those which did not meet the standards of the sacrificial animals would be
diverted to other purposes.
  While admiring Isaac’s broad scholarship and skilful presentation, I had
previously tended to discount this religious approach to the origins of cattle
domestication on the basis that his supporting data were drawn almost
entirely from late prehistoric representations or from representations and
writings of historical periods. All of this evidence, while definitely portraying
cattle in religious contexts, was too long after the fact, I thought, to have
bearing on the actual time of domestication. Additionally, there seemed little
hope of finding archaeological evidence which would shed light on such a
theory.
   I am less certain than I used to be that no archaeological evidence can be
found, and the reason for tending to change my mind is the obvious impor¬
tance of the cattle, and what certainly seems to be a cattle-cult, at Qatal
Hiiyiik68. Here perhaps is the place to test, with actual stratified archaeological
material, the possibility of religious practices involving wild cattle leading to
the use of cattle as the servant of man69.
  The introduction of cattle into village-farming and town-farming economy
may have caused some important cultural changes, although not necessarily
immediately. Cattle were the first domestic animals capable of pulling a
plough. The earliest representations of ploughs are from Warka IV (I am
quoting Isaac), c. 5200 ? B.P.70 The question is, how much earlier were ploughs
lated on the basis of a half-life of 5570 years.
                                       Animal domestication in the Near East       375


intensively used ? Lacking remains of ploughs, which were wooden, archaeol¬
ogists might well look for changes in settlement-patterns and for possible
population increases after the domestication of cattle. These changes could
have been initiated by more intensive cultivation following the introduction of
the plough. Possibly too some evidence of stables, not so necessary for the
smaller artiodactyls, will be found coincident with the appearance of cattle.
Today amongst some of the mountain nomads of south-western Asia, cattle
are used as pack animals. Is there any archaeological evidence of increased
volume of trade after the appearance of cattle ?
  As mentioned, domestic cattle are found later in south-western Asia than
are sheep and goats. The first known Asiatic domestic cattle, those reported
from Tepe Sabz at Deh Luran in Iranian Khuzistan71, may have been as
early as 7450 b.p. Another early date is for the site of Banahilk, a Halafian
site in the mountains of northern Iraq, as I stated in 196172. The date of
Banahilk is c. 7000 b.p.73 Stampfli74 could not find any evidence of domestic
cattle at Jarmo or Matarrah, and in the ‘Amuq sequence near Antioch he
cannot discern domestic cattle prior to Phase C, and then only tentatively.
Only with Phase D (c. 6200 b.p.) does he find definite evidence of domestic
cattle.
  Thus the problem of the origin and spread of domestic cattle, as with other
problems in the prehistory of south-western Asia, presents us with a mystery.
The cattle are found first in Greece, and then in far-distant Khuzistan, and
then in northern Iraq, but not until later on the eastern Mediterranean coast.
However, numerous Anatolian sites (Hacilar, £atal Hiiyiik, Suberde) have
sequences in the time range of that of the early cattle in Greece. From
Suberde, at least, some 25,000 bones were salvaged75, and the study of these
and of the bones from other Anatolian sites should do much to unravel the
mysteries of early domestication of cattle in south-western Asia76.



          Notes
          1 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and
            barley, Science, 153, pp. 1074-80; Zohary, D., this volume, pp. 47-66.
          2 Radulesco, C. and Samson, P. (1962). Sur un centre de domestication du
            mouton dans le Mesolithique de la grotte “La Adam” en Dobrogea,
            Z. Tierzucht ZiichtBiol, 76, pp. 282-320.
          3 Wright, H. E., Jr. (1961). Pleistocene glaciation in Kurdistan, Eiszeitalter
            und Gegenwart, 12, pp. 131-64.
          4 Wright, H. E., Jr. (1968). Natural environment of early food production
            north of Mesopotamia, Science, 161, pp. 334-9.
          5 Garrod, D. A. E. (1957). The Natufian culture: The life and economy of
            Mesolithic people in the Near East, Proc. Brit. Acad., 43, pp. 211-27.
          6 Perrot, J. (1966). Le gisement Natoufien de Mallaha (Eynan), Israel,
            U Anthropologie, 70, pp. 437-83.
          7 Solecki, R. L. (1964). Zawi Chemi Shanidar, a post-Pleistocene village
376   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication         REED


         site in northern Iraq, Rep. Vlth Inter. Congr. Quaternary, Warsaw, 1961,
         IV, pp. 405-12.
       8 Young, T. C., Jr. and Smith, P. E. L. (1966). Research in the pre¬
         history of central western Iran, Science, 153, pp. 386-91; The site of
          Ganj-Dareh Tepe, on the “inner” (north-eastern) side of the Zagros
         range, would seem to have been too early, some ten thousand five hundred
         years ago, and at too high an altitude, which implies harsh winter cold at
         that period, to have been a permanent village with definite house-walls.
         The earliest carbon 14 determination may be found to be erroneous, or—
         we will have to change our minds as to what is right and proper for pre¬
         historic peoples to have done. We have had to change before.
       9 The Natufian “dog”, which had become firmly entrenched in some books
         and monographs, was shown, independently, by Glutton-Brock, J. (1962).
         Near Eastern canids and the affinities of the Natufian dog, Z. Tierziicht
         ZuchtBiol., 76, pp. 326-33; and Reed, C. A. (1961). Osteological evidences
         for prehistoric domestication in south-western Asia, Z. Tierziicht
         ZuchtBiol., 76, pp. 31-8, to be within the range of variation of the local
         Palestinian wolf.
      10 Perkins, D., Jr. (1964). Prehistoric fauna from Shanidar, Iraq, Science,
         144, pp. 1565-6.
      ill use dates in b.p. (Before Present), in preference to the common practice
         of stating them as B.c. (Before Christ), because the latter usage indicates
         to most people an accuracy and validity which we cannot yet know in pre¬
         historic studies. The “radiocarbon year” is not necessarily the same length
         as the calendric year, being sometimes longer and sometimes shorter.
         There is considerable literature on this subject which I have summarized
         (1966). Organic remains from the Yale University Nubian Expedition’s
         archaeological sites DI-21B and WO-2A, with a discussion of the radio¬
         carbon determinations, Postilla,Yale Peabody Museum, 102, pp. 35-46, for
         myself and others who do not understand everything published in
         journals of geophysics.
      12 van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E., Jr. (1963). Preliminary pollen studies at
         Lake Zeribar, Zagros Mountains, south-western Iran, Science, 140, pp.
         65—7; Wright, H. E., Jr. (1966). Stratigraphy of lake sediments and the
         precision of the palaeoclimatic record, in Royal Meteorological Society
         Proceedings of the International Symposium on World Climate from 8000 to
         0 B.C. London, pp. 157-73; Wright, H. E., Jr., McAndrews, J. H. and
         van Zeist, W. (1967). Modern pollen rain in western Iran, and its relation
         to plant geography and Quaternary vegetational history, J. Ecology, 55,
         pp. 415-43; Megard, R. O. (1967). Late-Quaternary Cladocera of Lake
         Zeribar, western Iran, Ecology, 48, pp. 179-89; van Zeist, W. (1967).
         Late Quaternary vegetation history of western Iran, Rev. Palaeobot. and
         Palynol., 2, pp. 301-11.
      13 The proposal that a period of rapid climatic change coincided with, and
         may have had some stimulating effect on, the change from hunting and
         gathering cultures to early agricultural and/or herding ones runs counter
         to the thought of the past fifteen years that relatively little climatic change
         had occurred in most of south-western Asia at the close of the Pleistocene.
         As one of the proponents (Reed, C. A. and Braidwood, R. J. (i960).
         Toward the reconstruction of the environmental sequence in north¬
         eastern Iraq, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, 31, pp. 163-73) of
         that theory, I do wish to call attention to the fact that Braidwood and I
         stated that the mammalian fossils upon which we were then basing our
         conclusions would not be as accurate palaeoclimatic indicators as would
         pollen, when and if a pollen record could be found. It has now, with
         much supporting evidence. I, for one, bow to Lake Zeribar, although I
          ave no intention ol reviving any suggestion of the desiccation theory of
                                 Animal domestication in the Near East        377


       animal domestication. For a list of references to the recent theory of
       climatic continuity in south-western Asia, see Hole, F. (1966). Investigat¬
       ing the origins of Mesopotamian civilization. Science, 153, pp. 605-11,
       footnote 8. I agree with Hole that true urbanization probably was little
       influenced by any climatic changes, although obviously such an early site
       as Jericho may now be more explicable than some of us have found it
       priorly, on the basis that the climate during the Pre-Pottery periods (A
       and B) was probably cooler, even if not wetter than it is today.
  14 Vignard, E. (1923). Une nouvelle industrie lithique, le “Sebilien”, Bull.
       Inst.fran. Arch, orient., 22, pp. 1-76, pi. XIV bis; Reed, C. A., BaumhoflF,
       M. A., Butzer, K. W. Walter, H. and Boloyan, D. S. (1967). Preliminary
       report on the archaeological aspects of the research of the Yale University
      Prehistoric Expedition to Nubia, 1962-3, Antiq. Dept. Egypt, Fouille en
      Nubie, (1961-1963), pp. 145-56; Butzer, K. W. and Hansen, C. L.
      (1968). Desert and River in Nubia. Madison, particularly pp. 135-6 and
      170-2.
  15 Clark, J. D. (1965). The later Pleistocene cultures of Africa, Science, 150,
      pp. 833-47.
  16 Maguire, B. (1965). Foreign pebble pounding artifacts in the breccias and
      the overlying vegetation soil at Makapansgat Limeworks, A. Afr. Arch.
      Bull., 20, pp. 117-30; Dart, R. A. (1965). Pounding as a process and the
      producer of other artifacts, S. Afr. Arch. Bull., 20, pp. 141-7.
 17 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, pp.
      1-560.
 18 Moir, R. J. (1965). The comparative physiology of ruminant-like
     animals, in Dougherty, R. W. et al (eds.) Physiology of Digestion in the
     Ruminant. Washington.
 19 Cottrell, F. (1955). Energy and Society. New York. p. 20.
 20 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). ibid.
 21 The field experiments of Harlan, J. R. (1967). A wild wheat harvest in
     Turkey, Archaeology, 20, pp. 197-201. indicate the necessity of having a
     somewhat permanent place of living once harvesting of cereals had become
     common. Working in south-western Turkey where wild einkorn wheat
     grew densely, Harlan used a prehistoric flint sickle and harvested the
     equivalent of two pounds or more of clean grain per hour. In the three-
     week period typically available for such harvesting of wild wheats a family
     could have gathered enough seed to last them for a year. With some 330-50
    pounds of grain per person (equal to a ton or more for a family of six), the
    harvesters were obviously going to have to store their newly-gained food
    and to stay around to protect and eat it. The first simple villages may have
    grown up around such storage places.
22 van Loon, M. N. (1966). Mureybat: An early village in inland Syria,
    Archaeology, 19, pp. 215-16; van Loon, M. N. (1966). The Euphrates
    Valley Expedition, Report for 1965-66, The Oriental Institute, Univ. of
    Chicago, pp. 17-22; de Contenson, H. (1966). Decouvertes recentes
    dans le domaine du Neolithique en Syrie, L’Anthropologie, 70, pp. 388-91.
23 Perrot, J. (1967). Munhata, Bible et Terre Saint, 93, pp. 4-16; also
    Personal communication.
24 Ducos, P. (1965). Contribution a l’etude de l’histoire de la domestication:
    etude des faunes post-paleolithiques de Palestine, du Mesolithique a l’Age
    du Bronze. These de Doctor at de Sciences de VUniversite de Bordeaux.
    pp. 1-324. (I have not seen the original of this thesis, but Dr. Ducos
    very kindly sent me an extended summary of his results; Ducos, P., this
    volume, pp. 265-75.
25 Helbaek, H. (1966). Pre-Pottery Neolithic farming at Beidha, Palestine
    Exploration Quarterly, Jan.-June 1966, pp. 61-6; Helbaek, H. (1966).
378   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication        reed


          Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20,
         pp. 350-60.
      26 Perkins, D., Jr. (1966). The fauna from Madamagh and Beidha, Palestine
         Exploration Quarterly, Jan.-June 1966, pp. 66-7.
      27 Hopf, M., this volume, pp. 355—9.
      28 Zeuner, F. E. (1955). The goats of early Jericho, Palestine Exploration
          Quarterly, 1955, pp. 70-86.
      29 Ducos, P. (1966). Los huesos de animales, in Gonzales-Etchegarroy, J.
         Excavacions en le Terrazee le El Khiem (Jordania), 2.
      30 Hopf, M., this volume, ibid.
      31 Reed, C. A. (1959). Animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
          Science, 130, pp. 1629-39; Reed, C. A. (i960). A review of the archae¬
         ological evidence on animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
         in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. Prehistoric Investigations in Iraqi
         Kurdestan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, Oriental Institute,
         Chicago, 31, pp. 119-45> Fig- 7-
      32 Schenkel, R. (1967). Submission: Its features and function in the wolf
         and dog, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 319-29; Kleiman, D. G. (1967). Some aspects
         of social behaviour in the Canidae, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 365-72; Scott, J. P.
         (1967). The evolution of social behaviour in dogs and wolves, Amer. Zool.,
         7, pp. 373-81.
      33 Woolpy, J. H. and Ginsberg, B. E. (1967). Wolf socialization: A study of
         temperament in a wild social species, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 357-63.
      34 I can testify to the truth of this innate friendliness of young wolves, as I
         once handled four of them in northern Iraq; their parents had been
         killed by a Kurdish hunter, who was taking the young to Kirkuk to be
         sold. (Such practices, even though uncommon, must inject a certain
         minimum of genes from wolves into the population of Iraqi dogs.) The
         pups—appealing balls of fur some four or five weeks old—were all
         friendliness with no sign of distrust in spite of having been separated from
         home and parents, carried for some hours in a bag, and then dumped out
         helter-skelter on the ground. One had lost a forepaw when captured, but
         not even such an injury evoked hostility.
      35 Fentress, J. C. (1967). Observations on the behavioral development of a
         hand-reared male timber wolf, Amer. Zool., 7, pp. 339-51.
      36 Woolpy, J. H. and Ginsberg, B. E. (1967). ibid.
      37 Scott, J. P. (1967). ibid.
      38 Adamson, J. (i960). Born Free, a Lioness of Tzvo Worlds. New York. pp.
          1-220.
      39 Fentress, J. C. (1967). ibid.
      40 Degerbql, M. (1961). On a find of a pre-boreal domestic dog (Canis
         familiaris L.) from Star Carr, Yorkshire, with remarks on other Meso¬
         lithic dogs, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 27, pp. 35-55.
      41 Lawrence B. (In press). Evidences of animal domestication at Cayonii,
         Bull. Turkish Hist. Soc.
      42 Lawrence, B. (1967). Early domestic dogs, Z. Sauget., 32, pp. 44-59.
      43 Reed, C. A. (1961). ibid.
      44 Lawrence, B. (In press), ibid.; Lawrence, B. (1967). ibid.
      45 Braidwood, R. J. (1966). The Prehistoric Project, Report for 1956/66,
          The Oriental Institute, Univ. of Chicago, pp. 24-6.
      46 Reed, C. A. (1961). ibid.
      47 Zeuner, F. E. (1958). Dog and cat in the Neolithic of Jericho, Palestine
         Exploration Quarterly, 1958, pp. 52-5.
      48 Clutton-Brock, J., this volume, pp. 337-45.
      49 Mellaart, J. (1967). Catal Hiiyiik: A Neolithic town in Anatolia. New
         York. pi. 57.
      50 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). 1 he fauna of the prehistoric archaeological sites of
                               Animal domestication in the Near East       379


   Jarmo, Matarrah, Karim Shahir, and the Amouq in south-western Asia.
   (Manuscript to be published by the Oriental Institute, Univ. of Chicago.)
51 Flannery, K. V. (1961). Skeletal and radiocarbon evidence for the start
   and spread of pig domestication. Thesis for the degree of Master of Arts,
    Dept, of Anthropology, Univ. of Chicago.
52 Lawrence, B. (In press), ibid.
53 Perkins, D., Jr. (1964). ibid.
54 Lawrence, B. (In press), ibid.
55 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). ibid.
56 Higgs, E. S. (1967). Early domesticated animals in Libya, in Bishop,
   W. W. and Clark, J. D. (eds.) Background to Evolution in Africa. Chicago,
   pp. 165-73.
57 Prehistoric people often did diabolic things which thwart modern pre¬
    historians.
58 Perkins, D., Jr. (1966). ibid.
59 Darwish M. Al-Far, a Bedouin from Sinai who is now an Egyptian
    geologist, has told me that modern Bedouins often drive sheep from the
    interior of Sinai to towns along the Suez Canal to sell them. Additionally
    he stated that, following winters and springs with more than average
   precipitation, the crossing of the whole of Sinai on foot with flocks of
    sheep and goats would present no trouble.
60 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). ibid.
61 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. (1965). Early agriculture and
   animal husbandry in Deh Luran, Iran, Current Anthropology, 6, pp.
    105-6; Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100.
62 Perkins, D., Jr. (1966). ibid.
63 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. (1965). ibid.; Flannery, K. V. this
   volume, ibid.
64 Zeuner, F. E. (1955). ibid.
65 Boessneck, J. (1962). Die Tierreste aus der Argissa-Magula vom praekera-
   mischen Neolithikum bis zur mittleren Bronzezeit. In Milojcic, V.,
   Boessneck, J. and Hopf, M., Die Deutschen Ausgrabungen auf der Argissa-
   Magula in Thessalien, I. Beitrage zur ur- und friihgeschichtlichen Archae-
   ologie des Mittelmeer-Kulturraumes, 2, pp. 37-99. (Not seen; quoted
   from Stampfli.)
66 Higgs, E. S. (1962). Excavations at the early Neolithic site at Nea Niko-
   medeia, Greek Macedonia (1961 season). Part II. The biological data:
   Fauna, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 28, pp. 271-4, Fig. 3.
67 Isaac, E. (1962). On the domestication of cattle, Science, 137, pp. 195-204.
68 Mellaart, J. (1967). ibid.
69 Additionally, Ducos (1966). ibid., has suggested that the goats which he
   thinks to have been domestic at El Khiam, in southern Palestine, had been
   killed as part of a sacrificial rite. The majority of the goat bones were
   from animals only a month old, and the long bones, delicate at that young
   age, often remained unbroken, as if the animals had not been eaten.
70 Ehrich, R. W. (ed.) (1965). Chronologies in Old World Archaeology.
   Chicago, pp. 1-557.
71 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. (1965). ibid.
72 Reed, C. A. (1961). ibid.
73 Ehrich, R. W. (1965). ibid.
74 Stampfli, H. R. (1966). ibid.
75 Bordaz, J. (1966). Anatolian Research Project, Suberde excavations: Pre¬
   liminary report, New York Univ., Dept, of Classics, Bull., 66-2, pp. 1-3.
76 My field work in south-western Asia was initiated and thereafter en¬
   couraged by Professor Robert Braidwood of the Oriental Institute,
   University of Chicago. To him, and his financial sponsors, I am most
   grateful. My own ideas develop slowly, and indeed may often be borrowed
380   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     reed


        from others without memory of the original source. Both in the field in the
        Nearer Orient and at many conferences and random meetings in the
        United States I have discussed the problems of Near Eastern prehistory
        with Robert and Linda Braidwood, Bruce Howe, Herbert Wright, Patty
        Jo Watson, Barbara Lawrence, Hans Helbaek, Jack Harlan, Frank Hole,
        Kent Flannery, Dexter Perkins and many others.
      RUTH TRINGHAM

      Animal domestication in the Neolithic cultures of the
      south-west part of European U.S.S.R.


My aim in this paper is to present analyses of the animal bone material from a
number of early prehistoric sites in the south-western part of the U.S.S.R.,
since these are only rarely available to research workers in this country (Figs. 4
and 5); I have also tried to indicate their archaeological context (Figs. 1 and 2).
I have not attempted, however, to put forward or support any claims for early
•independent domestication of any animals.
  It may be said for certain that the forest/steppe and steppe north of the
Black Sea in the Ukraine and Moldavian republics is, so far, the region where
domesticated animals first occur on prehistoric sites in the U.S.S.R., apart
from the settlements of the Dzeitun culture in Turkmenia in central Asia.
This was probably a result predominantly of the early prehistoric settlements
of this region being closest to the early agricultural settlements of south-east
Europe, although it seems from the early post-glacial period to have been an
area rich in wild pigs in particular, and also wild cattle.
  In this region a number of claims have been put forward by Soviet
archaeologists for the possible evidence especially in the Crimea and Mol¬
davia for an early independent development of domestication of animals
before the introduction of pottery manufacture, for what may be termed an
“aceramic neolithic” culture. However, before the north Pontic aceramic
neolithic sites are accepted as indubitable proof of an early centre of animal
domestication, it should be questioned firstly whether the sites are as early
as they have been claimed; that is, earlier, than the introduction of a produc¬
tive agricultural economy from western Asia to south-east Europe, as
represented in the Karanovo I/Starcevo/K6ros/Cri§ group of cultures; and
secondly whether the animal bones show definite traces of domestication.
  This applies particularly to the claims for very early domesticated pigs in
the cave sites of the south Crimean mountains: Tas Ayir and Zamil Koba1.
Both caves have late palaeolithic material at the base, overlain by two
mesolithic strata, the earlier referred to as the “Crimean Azilian” industry,
and the later as the “Crimean Tardenoisian” industry. Above these are two
neolithic layers, the lower with a few shreds of coarse undercoated pottery
—
                        Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.     383




Fig 2 Cultural contexts of the sites referred to in the text.


similar to the Kukreks ware of north Crimea, and the upper representing a
culture very similar to the middle phase of the Dnieper-Donetz culture of the
lower and middle Dnieper basins, and may be compared to such sites as
Buzki and Vovnigi. The flint blade industry of both neolithic layers continues
the traditions of the preceding mesolithic layers. Above the neolithic strata,
are layers representing cultures from the Bronze Age to the mediaeval period.
A large number of pig bones have been found in all but the two uppermost
layers. Even in the earliest layers domesticated, as well as wild and undis-
tinguishable immature, animals have been identified.
  It is worth noting, however, the difficulty in distinguishing between wild
and domesticated pigs, since they are easily domesticated and as easily revert
to the wild state2. In the Soviet Union, the distinction is made especially
on a basis of size, the larger animals being identified as wild, and the smaller
animals as domesticated3. Moreover, it has been noted that the wild pigs
excavated in the upper palaeolithic cave settlements were small animals
compared with the large wild pigs of the later, neolithic layers4. As mentioned
above, in these latter layers, the smaller animals have been identified as
384   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    tringham


domesticated. It seems possible, therefore, that there existed in the Crimea
at this time two strains of pig, a small and a large one, both wild. Thus, even if
the stratigraphical evidence of the Crimean cave-sites is regarded as valid, it
seems highly unlikely, at this stage, that the pigs in the lower, mesolithic,
layers represent domesticated animals. It seems more probable that domesti¬
cated pigs do not occur in the Crimea until at least the early neolithic layers,
or even later, when they may also be observed in the lower Dnieper basin.
  However, there is definite evidence for a wide distribution of wild pigs in
this area, and particularly the Crimea itself, since the immediate post-
Pleistocene period; and, moreover, there is evidence for specialized hunting
of wild pigs during this period. In fact, the process of a local domestication
of pigs in the Crimea, as described by Stoljar, may very well have occurred,
but probably at a rather later date than he envisaged5.
  There is, as yet, no evidence for the relative chronological position of the
Crimean Tardenoisian settlements apart from an ante quem date provided
by the later neolithic dates which, as mentioned above, are related to the
middle phase of the Dnieper-Donetz culture6. This phase, by the discovery
of a Tripolye pot at Nikolskii, has been equated chronologically with the
middle phase of the Tripolye culture of the western Ukraine; that is, the
second half of the fourth millennium.
  In the Bug-Dniester basin, until very recently, the earliest evidence for
domesticated animals were the cattle found on sites of the early phase of the
Bug-Dniester culture, at a time contemporary with the earliest agricultural
settlements of Rumania, represented by the Cri§ culture, hi the late sixth/
early fifth millennium. On many sites in this region, the early phase of the Bug-
Dniester culture was preceded by what was termed an “aceramic neolithic”
culture, quite unjustifiably since there was no evidence for the domestication
of any plants or animals; however, its geometric microlithic blade industry,
which seems typologically related to the Crimean Tardenoisian flint industry,
quite clearly provided the antecedents for the flint blade industry of the early
phase of the Bug-Dniester culture. Recently, however, in the lower levels of
two stratified sites in Moldavia, Soroki (Trifautski les land 2), the bones of
domesticated, as well as wild, pig, have been found in association with this
mesolithic or “aceramic neolithic” industry and dated by carbon-14 to the
late sixth millennium B.C., earlier than any dates yet obtained from the earliest
agricultural settlements of south-east Europe, even of Bulgaria7.
   However, it should be noted that in the later phases of the locally-developed
 Bug-Dniester culture, bones from domesticated pigs have not been identified8.
It is conceivable, therefore, that the same situation as that observed in the
Crimea may also exist in the Bug-Dniester basin.
  An independent development of cattle-breeding in the Ukraine was claimed
for the north Pontic steppe, but this is even more dubious. In the lowest
layers ol the stratified site of Kamennaya Mogila, north-west of the Sea of
 Azov, in two aceramic layers, levels I—III and IV—V, again in association with
                                      Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.   385




            mi N13hM9
           (pAalwjblS3MQ
            3A3MIH1 31yi
      X                                                                                 vO
           (StSIUC^MdSlNO                                                               _J     4-1
                                                                                        <c      0
      h    JAIOdlHi. 31V7
                                                                                                C/3
                   3)?d31N<]                                                                    4>
                                                                                                +-■
NP          3A70dlHr<NIW
<                                                                                       <c      C/3

                     unBt                                                               zx      O
            3X70319100 in                                                               _j
                                                                                                O

A             H3133IN0                                                                          c/5
                                                                                                                 cn
            jAiantucciw                                                                        2                 (L)
                                                                                                                 •M
                                                                                                <u
                                                                                                                 C/5
           (>? 3xiodin±                                                                         a,
K                                                                                       o                        £
                      X1»V3                                                             <c                       eg
                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                 r-*
           2J-      (N\/IOS~)
vi/                                                                                             c3
                                                                                                <U
           iNiinonj-ynj                                                                                         "u
      x                                                                                 w       <D
                                                                                                                u
Z              XuJJJOd                                                                                            <L>
  t-                                                                                    v_i^    4—»             i rj
A                HV3UI7
                                                                                               <4-»             V-<
             103 N 3J.V1                                                                        O
 I             ■+ 33dd Ic-J                                                                                      C
           «3i«iN<i-9ne                                                                        , ,               cq
      o                                                                                        •S                c3
                                                                                               *n                a
           103H        X7HV3                                                                    <D               f-
Z *         h?±S3lN(l-9/19
                                                                                                4-<
                                                                                                ctf             ‘E
/A z                                                                                            C                CC
                                                                                                c
             "3lUJVd30V/                                                                                        -r^
                                                                                                                 <Li
           M3193IN<]-9n9                                                                vO     <u
                                                                                        _1     rH
                                                                                               >-(               fX
                                                                                                                 0
      -J                                                                                <      O
                   A3!IV9;
      o         703/V.J                                                                        A                 od
           9333! NO 93007                                                                                        <L

                  7039 JJ-V7                                                                   ,c
           901399 93d3\N<l                                                                      2
\0 °                                                                                            TO
                                                                                                                <4-
                                                                                                                 c
<_         1039 &3d3l9<J
                                                                                                <D
                                                                                                                 c/
                      3ia<3lW                                                                                    b
                                                                                               *-■               «
             703N STCXIIW                                                                                        4-
A 1                                                                                             rj               C
   H       tilldVHdOdOlHd                                                                      •a                <1
A.                                                                                              C/3             j-
                                                                                                                (3.
M-< -        709N 370am                                                                                #
                                                                                               zs               c
                    NV3Wl!P                                                                     a               1
                                                                                                      Pi
                                                                                               TS          ✓—'nP-
A                  ATUV3                                                                       ’>
                                                                                                      00
           OOldW 9333INO                                                                       ’S     CO    D    £
 z                                                                                                         T3
                                                                                                c
 <          7039 A19V3                                                                                p
      ui                                                                                                T> 4
<                V3? AOZV                                                                      4h
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                    03
                                                                                                    <U   C/5 C.
             103N ADIV3                                                                         c/3 cu C-> j;
                                                                                                         4—J .J
                   NV3WI^I3                                                                     1)  0
                                                                                                bfl (-1  C/5 0
                                                                                                cS  a
£L VI
   o       ,NVIflON30Wl                                                                         *->
                                                                                                a w
kj w               NV3WIS3                                                                      <u      «s^
      X.                                                                                        O
                                                                                                u
            05                                                                                  <u      .50 c
                                                                                               Ph 06
                               o''-                                                                     tlv ?
                                                                                                              cj
                    O - ^ <3>                                                                            ^ eJ
                                                                                               .4d       oj 5
            ^          S 2.                                                                             5^,4
                                                                                               ti.
C FMM£A AN» PN.I6K* &A6IN              &U&-[>NKST<K &A6IN
ME40L.   NEOLITHIC.         E NEOC..   NEOLITHI   C   ENEOLITHIC
                          Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.               387

the local geometric microlithic blade industry, a large number of cattle bones
have been excavated and claimed by Pidoplicko as belonging to domesticated
animals9. Ovicaprid bones, likewise claimed as domesticated, are also present
in relatively large numbers. Danilenko has suggested that the aceramic layers
at Kamennaya Mogila are at least as early as the Crimean Tardenoisian sites
and that their evidence indicates a centre for the initial development of cattle
breeding in the lower Don basin, immediately west of the Sea of Azov,
although no sites of this kind, apart from Kamennaya Mogila, have yet been
discovered10. He moreover suggests that it was the westwards spread of cattle
breeding from this region which caused the increase in cattle breeding in the
later neolithic cultures of south-east Europe and its introduction to central
temperate Europe in the Linear Pottery cultures. Most other Soviet archaeo¬
logists, however, deny this possibility and prefer one of two alternatives:
either the so-called domesticated cattle bones do not belong to the aceramic
layers but to later levels, since originally the different levels were not distin¬
guished by Pidoplicko in his analysis; or the aceramic levels are not as early
as they have been claimed, but are contemporary with the Dnieper-Donetz
culture, where domesticated cattle often occur11.
  The earliest more conclusive evidence for cattie domestication in Moldavia
and the Ukraine is that associated with the early phase of the Bug-Dniester
culture, as seen in the animal bone material from Mitkov island on the
Dniester12. This culture bordered directly on the distributional area of the
Cri§ culture which spread to Rumanian Moldavia from the Danube basin
in the early fifth millennium. The animal bone material from the Cri§ site of
Glavane§ti Vechi shows a predominance of domestic cattle, with rather less
domesticated ovicaprids and very few pigs13.
  Sites of the Cri§ culture have not yet been discovered east of the Prut river,
but a certain amount of contact with the Cri§ settlements is observable in the
early phase of the Bug-Dniester culture14. No other domesticated animals


Fig 4 Percentages of individuals among the domesticated animals of the early
     prehistoric sites of S.W. European U.S.S.R.
     The sites included are: 1. Crimean Tardenoisian: Murzak Koba, Zamil Koba II,
     Tas Ayir I; 2. Crimean early neolithic: Zamil Koba II, Tas Ayir I; 3. Azov Sea early
     neol.: Kruglik, Kamennaya Mogila I—III j 4. Dnieper Rapids early neol.: Surski is. I,
     Igreni VIII, Sulayevo; 5. Crimean middle neol.: Zamil Koba II, Tas Ayir I; 6. Dnieper
     Rapids middle neol.: Sobacki is. II, Igreni V; 7. Middle Dnieper middle neol.:
     Buzki; 8. Dnieper Rapids late neol.: Strelca Skelya; 9. Lower Dnieper eneolithic
     (early pit grave culture): Mikhailovka I (lower layer); 10. Bug-Dniester culture,
     aceramic phase: Soroki 1:2, Soroki 2:2 and 3; n. Bug-Dniester culture, early phase:
     Soroki 1:1b, Soroki 2:1, Soroki 3, Mitkov is.; 12. Bug-Dniester culture, middle and
     late phases: Soroki 1:1a, Basikov is., Soroki 5, Tsikinovka I; 13. Linear Pottery
     culture: Novia Ruse§ti I, Flore§ti (lower layer), (Tsira); 14. Pre-Cucuteni II: Flore§ti
     (upper layer); 15. Tripolye A (early Tripolye): Luka Vrublevetskaya, Bernovo Luka;
     16. Middle Tripolye (Dniester): Polivanov Yar; 17. Middle Tripolye (southern Bug):
     Sabatinovka I; 18. Middle Tripolye (Dnieper): Kolemiiscina II, Khalepye; 19. Late
     Tripolye (middle Dnieper): Podgorcie; 20. Late Tripolye (lower Dniester): Usatovo;
     2i. Gulmeni;a culture: Bolgrad, Ozernoye, Vulcane§ti.
     Sus scrofa L. is included in the percentages of domesticated animals of the Crimean
     sites and is shown by lighter shading in the appropriate column.
388   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication     tringham


apait from cattle and dogs have yet been found in the settlements of this
phase. Nor have they been found in the sites of the middle phase of the
Bug-Dniester culture as seen in the animal bone material from Basikov
island on the Dniester river15.
   The middle phase of the Bug-Dniester culture has been shown to be
contemporary with the Linear Pottery culture of the Ukraine and Moldavia
whose settlements are distributed in the forest/steppe of the upper Dniester
basin, generally rather north and west of those of the Bug-Dniester culture16.
The material of the Dniester basin Linear Pottery settlements is very closely
related to that of the central European Linear Pottery sites, as seen at Bylany17,
especially to the late phase of this culture which has been dated by the carbon-
14 method to 4100-3900 b.c. The bone analyses from the lower layers at
Floresti18 and Novi Ruse§ti19 in Soviet Moldavia, and Traian (Dealul Fin-
tinilor) in Rumanian Moldavia20, show a definite increase in the proportion of
wild animals as compared with that of the central European Linear Pottery
settlements, although this proportion is nevertheless considerably smaller
than that of the wild animals in the Bug-Dniester settlements (Fig. 3). Among
the domestic animal bones, cattle predominate (at Floresti, 93% of these
belong to the long-horned variety), pig are of rather less importance, whereas
ovicaprids are almost negligible (Fig. 4).
  The later neolithic cultures which spread to Moldavia and the western part
of the Ukraine from the Balkans, which were partly evolved from the Linear
Pottery cultures but which also had very strong elements from the Danube
basin, and which are referred to as the Pre-Cucuteni/Cucuteni-Tripolye
complex, show a similar predominance of domesticated animals over wild
ones (Fig. 3); the proportion of domesticated animals increases in the later
phases, especially in the Dniester basin21. A similar increase may be observed
in the extension of the more southern copper-using Gumelni^a culture, as at
Bolgrad, Vulcane§ti and Ozemoye in the lower Dniester basin22. Domesticated
cattle, ovicaprids, and pigs are present on all the sites of the Cucuteni/
Tripolye and Gumelnipa cultures, generally with cattle predominating
although in the later Tripolye sites and Gumelni^a sites of the lower Dniester
basin there is a marked increase in the importance of sheep (Fig. 4).
  Further east in the middle and lower Dnieper basin, the sites of the
Dnieper/Donetz culture, which in its middle phase is contemporary with the
middle phase of the Tripolye culture, do not show such a high proportion of
domesticated animals until the latest neolithic, as at Strelca Skelya23 and
especially the beginning of the pit-grave culture in the lower Dnieper steppes,
as at Mikhailovka I29. On these latter sites a large increase and predominance
of ovicaprids may be observed among the domesticated animals, similar to the
eneolithic sites of the lower Dniester steppe at Usatovo and Sandraki25.
   Domesticated horses are attested among the animal bone material of the
eneolithic sites of the lower Dnieper and Dniester steppes, and would seem
                                                                           -0                                            dr              «y
                            NT        V-D                                  Os               '-O                          0 6^                                r sf    dr        VO
                                                         x:                                                                               uj                         0                                                         cy        Go
                                                               2
                                                                           <3    (NT         —-                         fsy> y           -—     tsrs
                                                                                                                                                            -yp                rd vr                                                     bo
                     Q                                                                                                                                               ro        py py
                     >                                   Vj                                                                                                                    -X Lo
                     UJ               -                                              <~N     -                          O'    CO ry             cy          -        cV                                      dr CO                       M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •yj   rd        hh
                     >-               'O             <3-       ■^c        -J GC ry                                      cr cr V s                           <-y                 UJ      Co
                                      CD             cy        0          ~-o O 0                                                               cv                                                                              bo
                     -J                                                                                                 0 cy <0                             O                  27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         So
                  V)                                  O                                                                 0c    00 0                                             O                                                         O
                              r+         df           Oo       <T         e VC               —                                              LJ CO           - rv               Of
                                                                                                                                                                                      ho                     -j    rv    cy    cr
         z                    V          p<~ CO                cT3        GO                GO,           m             GO                      w
                  1=5         Cl      Go Go CK>                06         bo                bo            Od            Oo                      bo
         \n                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8         s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fig 5 Analyses of animal bones from late mesolithic and early neolithic sites of the Crimea and Lower Dnieper Basin.
         <T          *
                              c<~>                                                                                                              -                                                                              ^x>       k5
         CO          -J                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                     vb     g£  bo bo cy                      v^)         -D                vq            a~
                                                                                                          cv            vO                      Vo                                                                             dT       k)
                     £>
         cL          O'     ^-0 dT kf CO                                                                                                       U)                                                                              rk-      ry
                            oc ro cn
                     £      TO        cy                       -       -                    -             Oo            -                       dt                                                                       CV    V)       kO
         £                                                                                                                                                                                                               vO    -x-
                                                                       ~r vO y)                          f~y                  ~ u>             yp                   v-O
        Uj                                                                                                                                                                           y?                                                  0
                                                                          Vi Vy                          w                      kr>            VO                   v-O                                                             \    0
           7                                                                                                                                                                         ho
                  l>
        £                                                                        —          —            dr                  CN    —           ro                   CO               _                      dT                      1    Go

                  z                                                   ey                   GO                                <X,
                                                                                 r+7                     GO
        cC        UJ                                                                                                         o-    S2          DO                   nr               vO                                                  O
                                                                      rv~        o<                      kn                                                                                                                         1    O
        Ld        U                                                                                                                                                 cy
                  O                                                                                      \n
        D                                                             Co
                                                                                CO         ey            ^0                  cy cy             cr                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                     CO                     0            cy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cy

        O                  -T                 o- O-                   Un
                                              vxr CTT                                      cr;                               o- cr              ru                        cr          zr
                 H         <37                                        ^0                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                               rp                                                       ^-0'
        -I                                    O O                                          CO                                rd 0              cr                         O    cy                                              mi       cr-
                 vS                                                                                                                                                                                                     r>r\
    :    &                                                            c^_                                                                      O                                                                                        C3~
                           cy                  -    -                                      J-            ~                   OO    -                                      —    Of                           cr    -      O     dT
         Z                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cr-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The four columns of each site (from left to right) represent: (i) total number of bones of the species; (2) percentage
         <r                                                                                y>            y>                                                                    ry    Vo                                        bo        cy
                  y        00                  dr   -J                                                                           dr                                       Of   Go                                              Vy%
                                                                      >0                   cy
                                                                                                         Vn                   dr 0             dX                              cy    so
                           O                  O O                                                                                                                         <0                                                            §a
        <        o'
                  0                                                   <r                                 cr                                    0                               O kj-                                     m              GO
        U!                 dT                 cS    CN                                     kr>                                0
                                                                                                                                   o(                                     —    O-                           co    cy     CD    00
                 \n                                                   co                                 rk                  ry                ry                                                                        ho             S'-
        r


        O
                ui>) kn                                                                    yf-                                                                                                                                  dr
         UJ                          vd        GO                                                        of                                            -O                                                                               ■v-O
         X                                                                                 Vn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <v*
         h                                                    oy                           O             of                                                               0                                                    <3-      rd
                oW
                I          O                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘k>
         u_                                   Go              lr>                          -                                                           CO                 —                                              Cjo             dJ-
                                                                                                         LT
         O
           <    kf <y>                                         ~T CO                       ro                          rci r-O y>              v-O cn               ^£>              k»         c-p.                           (V
               ob krj                                                                                                  r^~» y~>                N> »^n                                ^0         cO
           >-                                                                              CO                                                                                                                                            GO‘
        Vi     kr>                                                    0                                                •O CD 0                 0 O                  O'               <Z)        0                                        OY
           <c
        Lu
           z                                                          -                    0                                       cy                                                                                                    oO
        t 7, , § J-                                                                                                    —                       0/      —            cy               of         ~           - cy                         rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s
        \0     dr bo                                                                       krs                                     cy
               c*V                                                    Of                                                                       of                   0-               dT         rJ                             kh       -O
           I 1 f> ~k>                                                                                                                                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of the total; (3) number of individuals represented by the total; (4) percentage of individuals. Grand totals
                                                    2         3                                                        9     O     O           0       O            0'               O          <P
                   -0
        O <CM Vo                                              O
                                                                      0                    cr                                                                                                                                            Gfj
           *       ro                               m                                                                        - co              0 -                  n-               In         m           -     *o     5:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ry
               CT                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2T
        X                                      tV                     cV
                                                                                ^X)        yr                  cr-.                            cn                                    -n:                                       <r        k>
                                                                                sso                            rr-                                                                   py                                        ty
                                              '-~C gD                                                          cy                              cr-
        h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <-y
                P -                           of    —                H -0 dT                                   cr                              cO                                    j-                                 GO     dX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s
        j
                           ry        dj-                                        -0 cv                          <>                                                                                                              v£>       kT
        O                                     — -                    Lr>                                                                       —                                     CD                                                  od
                                     0                                                                         In                                                                                                              ry
        LU      T “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bo               ko
                <T MJ                               cO                r+~ 0                 0
                          -          cy       rb                      ry 00                                                                    dT                                                                              £2*
        Z                                                                                  'O                                                                                        dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dT              rT
                                              GO                                                         ko    VO                              vn                                                                              rd       CO
                          CT                                          C5“       cr
                                                                                                         -i        X                           <r                                                                              04.      cV

        >-      *3 cy                                                                                                                                                                                                   ry              yp
                                              dT                     r< CV                 cr           —      —                               —                                                                               SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rd
        J
                                              co                     f+-                   Lo                  •OO                                                                                                             vO       kjr
                          CO                                                    rv-                     y>     ry                              —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CN       rd
        <                                                                                               0                                                                                                                               c 1—
                5 uiOf                        *3*                    cr cO                 y>                  bo                                                                                                              VD       cy
                                                                                                                                               —                                                                               kr
                K'y ry                        CN                     cy                    C>(          cv.-   y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      apply only to mammals. Sus scrofa L. refers to immature animals aged from 5 weeks to 1 year which cannot
                                                    to               rO V>                 ro 03                             Vo    bo Vo                                                               co                      In       n
                <                                                                                                                                                                              9;
                CO                                  CT               o~ <r                 -j -T                             <3-   -j cr                                                               kT                      hr       Si,
        a
         z      0                                                                                                                                                                                           rd Oo
                *                                                               rV         CO     —                          cy — o<                                                           dT -            rv       ry     ry       2T
        <r                                          cy               CO

                <                                                                                                                                                                              O cy                                     -0
                                                    r                           9 O               —                          dX cy dT                                                          00                              -T
                                                                     cs                                                                                                                                                                 cr
        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            cy 0  kT
                                                                     ry O O                                                                                                                    0                        cr
        r       r                                   -J-              cv       —                                              j-    cy dX                                                       co
                                                                                                                                                                                                       rV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            co ry       C7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~r       hr>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0-
        H                                                            G> Vn bn                                          Vr>                                                                                                              O
                                                                                                               *o                                                                                                               1       0
                                                                     r-y cy                                            ry
        j <r1=9
              «r
        0 CO cs                                                                                                                                                                                                         00      1        Oo
                                                                     — — cO                                    ri -
            9 «
        V"> i 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
        tu                                                            — Un                 Of                  O"                                                                                                               1        0
            J 0                                                                                                UD -
        z                                                                                                                                                                                                               rO
                                                                     00         -kX cr                         ho -                                                                                                     rk-     1       rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               kS“
                                              -X                        rx r-W                                  bQ           rk-        rd                                                                                     V>'
                                              Vci                    Gd n~ r*d                                  0            rd         pd pd                                                                                           s


        LAT E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      be determined as definitely wild or domesticated and which have been classed together with the wild animals.
                h5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CO     cy
                                              cy                                —          —                   dT            -          -      —                                                                                        zz
                                                                     ry
                >- 2                                                                                                                                                                                                           kr       lo
                                              dr                     rc                    (N                  O
                                                                                CO                             y             -          -      -                                                                               ry       n--
                                              cy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -O
                T *C                                                                                           0-                                                                                                              m        —
                d-d                           m                      in         V)         n-                                —          cy     cy                                                                              rO
                                              c~>                                                              fo
                                                                                           vr»                                                                                                                                 \n
                                            r
                                                    uo
                                                                     Vb         a:         O      -o
                                                                                                        '/J                  V)
                                                                                                                                        so     iQ                         0         vs         s£j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -J
                                                                                a_         Qi      v>                                                                                                                          <        y>
                                            0       V                D                     UJ     0
                                                                                                                             UJ         u      2       s < ^                                   p
                                            c,      V                X          <          u.                J                     V) -
                                                                     Cs.        V              X         z                       UJ vn                                                                                         ?        <
                           r>        vo             .4               <r                    «r 0          UJ <                    -U u
                          r>         —       u                Ow
                                                                                           u.     or     Vb u_
                                                                                                                                     >                                                                                  J      1        ?
                                                              V)     UJ
                                                                                           O <               0         ?     ? UJ 7d
                                            C                                              c£            I CC          D         r
                                            Otf     <                                                                  -1    \ft                                                                                        <
                                                              V) v>                        O O               O                      Vi
                                            vj                                  0                                                u>                                                                                     h      g        1
                          -          <
                                            V>      vn                          uj         v0 Vb         ftu n                                 5       ? !-V°             ^         "      x   U            vog
                                                                 >                            D                        a     k! UJ >(                                                                                   0
                                                                               U.
                          s          £              Z
                                                              cr Of            £>.         •n •n        Vrt    V       z     J J                                                                                               1        3
                          0          <              V                UJ                    ID                  3       <     X> U) UJ                                                                                   V-
                                     VJ                       UJ
                                                                               <C                        0
                                                                                                               V>                2: u-                                                                                         2        2
                                            VO      0                <u        U           V) D          0             VJ
i
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -^rr-
                                     r~v-          N            rv          3T
                rt-           rj-
           o                                       sT           u»>
                Cv~>                 vb

      J         "SO
                rx
                              O'     -3            o            O          Ob
                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                 n-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                CN
                CX                                                         sO                                                                                                                                   Zf>
                              ru Vr>               ^£}          o                                                                                                                                       P-*'
                                                                           r-W.                                                                                                                         Vo      5f-
                N             06 <r
      *5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 rr-    Oo      g;
                <—>           -cr DO               bn          fN          cN                                                                                                                           vr
      2.s       <T                Os/              rv-         vn          a-                                                                                                                    Vo

            vo                                                  fS         so m vn 3- vn 3~ SO                               3~ bo                            DO    <r                                  Oo      rx
     H_                                         o CT                                                                                                                           rb
            tvs’        Vo                                     3T     ct   Cn                                                   O
     - «                             ri      rv Vn uS                           rt vn c< CD -3                               O                                      o                                   V^      c?
     1- UJ                                                                                                                                                                                              rn
     w ?s              sO     <o            r»~ <S       3 O               bO                                                                                                                    3*
                                    vo                                Vn                o      QQ sO         -    ZT         —    (N                          cn               -3                       ro
     UJ < ts           m                                                                                                                                                                         rX             §
     \r> -J
            cN          r*- Vn sO                                           r-o rn                                           CO   fN                          CO               Vn                               cr
                                            Vrv C3T n<         Cjo cr                    vr V3"                 r?                                                  '<5                                 (N
     3s Oo  CSO        -~©     O            sj- Vn m           CSC CD      Vb o          o ri> ;             CD ON           d    d                           d     d          d                        sJD
     - 1                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                         sa
                        DO U-,               CiD DS- <3                    <-n                                                                                                                                  cr
                           cv                                  V3“    n-          o      CD- Vn      H            sO                                          o                72
                |                                s^O                                                                         cr sO                                  <N                           oo
     2 sx                                            Or-       (1—                       rN                                                                                                      rx     5       e*
                                                                           rN
                                                     N          CP                                   —o                           fN              sj>    rX
                CN                           VC>                                  cN     CN
                                                 cr Oo                                                                                                  Vn
                                                                                         Vn          <~s<                         vn              cs                                                    NO     ^
                                             CN                s?
                                                                                                                                                                                                 •VO            so
                                                   un    n-    00                                    —                            rN              —     CN                                       m       CN     m
     ~ -2       <~N                                                               CS    CN
     >
     O U)                                        CN                                                                                                     rx
                cr                          (N      C57                           O      Vn                                       so              3T
                                                cb             «~N                                                                                                                                              Vr>
                -3-                         <Z> SUD SO         DN                        O           o                            <d                    d                                               bn      cr~
                                                                                                                                                  d
     Cn ^
                r>                                 <r          o                                                                                                                                 Vn
     <r                                                        Co                                    —                                                                                                          Xs.
     CD v. c^T                              CN     UO v£                          OO     3“                                       vn              DO    CN                                       Oo     3       rt-


         o,

     vi <J
     ' * vaj

                zr                   -~r           DO <-N bo so                   N                                                          cx                                                                 cr
                                                                                  QO     m                                        <N
                                                          b
                                                      Vr> cst
     i; ~ZT                         o                         c£>                        O     o                                  <~N        d                                                          bn


cn   Ii         ZT
               r~                   sjr
                                                   <r CN
                                                      :dr      Dsj su             5j- cn        _
                                                                                                                                  CX
                                                                                                                                             (N
                                                                                                                                                                                                rX
                                                                                                                                                                                                DVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                O-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        bn


                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                rvs
                Vn                  cS      <r                 bo          s£>                                                    d                                       sO
     H?            Oo                                                                                                                                                                                           rtf.
                sf SO vO            DO      SUD                s3-                                                                cn
     <2
     *£                                                                                                                                                                                         «N
     > o  cr                 •J* (N                            CA          —                                                      CN                                      —                     —o              TZ
               D-n                          -3-                                                                                                                                                         bn
     3^ —o ex                                                                                                                                                                                            <Do    rx
     ~ UJ                           o-      CT                 CN          cn                                                     m                                       DO
          <5>0 V-o
               -D                   o       DO                 sj          o                                                      o                                       d


     Id         r+-
                px
                 (U—
                       O
                       ~-o o
                       rv- ru       Vo
                                 V/-*                    <-v
                                                               s           •3“
                                                                           sO           S-D
                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                  s£>                   fN
                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                sD
                                                                                                                                                                                                s-X>
                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                         S      ~3~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                sO

                             Kr* r*7                     Vr>   rv.                                                                                Vo
                X* ex                       •s-Q rb-                                                                                                    Vo                                              o       O
               3DA           oS “sD                                                                                                               m                                                     sO      <3
               o                             O     bo                                                                                                                                           s-O             Oo
      -J               rN N-O       —                     3- m             cN            CN                       cn                                                                     cr     so      So
               so                                  v~i                                                                            (N              vo 3“                                                 cr      SO
      UJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                        sO
      V)

      £
      \ft       *Q
                       SO
                       o
                          DO        Vo
                                    C^»
                                             Vr>
                                             OO
                                                   b
                                                               cn          bn            cN                       vn              rN              OO    bn                                r>-
                                                                                                                                                                                                cr~
                                                                                                                                                                                                dT      t~x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■T
                sO     ey¬   cr rr-                UO    3     3T                                                                 rN
                                                                                  cr           <3?                rt~                                                                                    O
                SP     es    o< Vo                 Cjo                                         CN                 Vn              N                                                                             §
                                                                                  K                                                                                                                      cy

                fO     —     -      cS             CO    3T    3T                 —            —                                                                                          —             Ps      bo
                                                                                                                  CN              vn                    Oo
      V
               rN cE. CO            rv-                        'n                 3                                                                     s-D
                                                   0- Vn                          m                                               Vn                                                                            Vn
      rvi      -3                                                                                                 rv                                                                                    bn
                                    CN             vn          cr                 o            vn
      3                                                                                                                                                 N                                               s:      £
      CO       rN
               ZP
                  CO         -T     cjo            sO    bo
                                                         n<
                                                               rV-
                                                               3^
                                                                                  —            _                  bn
                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                  ro
                                                                                                                                                        sO
                                                                                                                                                        rx                          UD    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                $
                <N           CT     CT       VO    a:          cO
                                                               -US                             cn           cn
                                                                           sj>                 S-D          So    N                     rX        rX    <N
                <o                  04s      O
                       <N    rV                    r^~         rS                                           rX                          Vn        •o'   Vn'
                                                                           t~N                 •-H                Vn

     >o  Vo OO rO CO                        -3- c-n            —           _                   _            _     cN                    rN        cN    cN                          CN   —              o:      cr
     < '^O Vo -Q                            r-O
                                                               fO          cr                               cr                                          cr
     CQ  rX rH    Uj-                                                                          DC                                       cn        n
                                            <~u    rv-                     O                                o                                           cS
     o                                                                                                                                                                                                  N       N
        '~JO ZT O                            CO    sO
     NO  Vo Vo    <3-                                          CO          rN                                                                                                                    Vn
                                            'sT                                                             —     cr                                                                                    vy      vO
                                                                                                                                        vn        r\-   r<                          (N    *n            CN      bv»
                                            so           sUJ   si)         cO
         O                   so                                                                      DO     cn -sip                                                                                     o       o
                                            s^>    Cr    SO    D-a         cO                        cb     rb SO                                                                                       CN      OO
     Ht
                             Vo             r(     r^i   CN    CN                                                                                                                               O               <r
     a! o                                                                  -                         —      -     cN                                                                                    VO
     _ UJ                                                                                                                                                                                       ro              <NI
     >-z
     <2
     H/> r
                Vn
                       6     S
                             r-O
                                            CO
                                            O
                                                   to    sO
                                                               rv-
                                                               -3*

                                                               D3~
                                                                           sO
                                                                                                     d      O
                                                                                                                  CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                        r>-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                cr

                                                                                                                                                                                                                P*
     <C ^       r+-                                do rv~                  O
                    -        CT             CO                 'or                                                <n                                                                                    rN      <N
      HSi       co                                 SO <r                                             -      -                                                                       rb                          bn
                                                               DO          o •                                    r<                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                 0~                 or.                  sO CT                                 <3-           Vo
                                                   c+r                            <3~                                                                   rv
               V£>                  Vo                   rv- Vo'
                                                                                  vn                        n' cr                                                                                       OO       rN
                                                                                               vn
      N                                                                                                     JZt Vri
                —                   -              CN m        -                  -            -                  -
                                                                                                            3-                                          ot                                      rfs             vr>
      2:                                                                                                                                                                                 Vn
                H-                                 r>- o~
      UJ                                                  -3-                     Vn           Zr           -0~
                                    cS             <>                                                                                                                                                           rx.
      ft£       rN                                 m      O                                                                                                                                             Jc
                                                                                  <r           O                  O
      Vb
               cr                                  v>n   bo
                                                                                                         O
               Cv •                 vr*
                                    —
                                                   rv-   n- —                     IZ           —         cH CN
                                                                                                                                                     rx
                                                                                                                                                     rx                             <N          N       <r      S?
                r*- tA rO                                      If                                    So V“>                             So        Vo VP                                                        -CN
                                    -3      Vn           H                                     to    ^T or C5“
               3^4.                                      n     b                                                                  bp                                                                    ■bj'
      N                                                                                 -CCi         •o' cS vb                                    d CD
      vS        Vo           CO             <N           bo —
                                                   b                       cn           Vo  3" - —                rn
                                                                                                                                                        -3                          sO                          vn
                       <-o                                                                                                                        le                                     <r      s      So
                         Vo                        sj                                       r-J                                                                                                 nnl     fb
                                                         V/>               CV-          Sr <n      rC*                                                                                                         —Dai_
      SO       cO                                                                                  rn
                       O O cH                      cn                                                             c9              vn              d     ST
      C£                                                 <3> o             o            <z>     <d d                              <s
                                                                                                                                                                                                        sO      -3
               rb                   cr      rv     DO

                                                                                                                                                                                         s?
                             lo                       bo                                                       o<
     Vo        <T                           DO     CO          —           rh                  (N    CN     cn fN                 Vo
                                                                                                                                                  rv-
                                                                                                                                                  Vn
                                                                                                                                                        vn
                                                                                                                                                        s3                          o
                                                                                                                                                                                                —       o
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -sn      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -i£L

                                                                           vr>
                             X V?                                                                           Vl    vn                                    V)         Z)
                                                                                                                        'i                        Vn
                                                                                                                                                                          <
                             8 £                   ft.    g 2 Vn        vn ct uj
                                                               VJ VD » vu \—
                                                                                 u:
                                                                                 Cft < UJ
                                                                                           o
                                                                                              < z cd       vj o
                                                         oa Js
                                                            ^ 30
                                                                  D o. 3 sn
                                                                              £  o 2 tft O 3 ot:
                                                                                                 < 3
                                                                                                    <      O cd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                             £ 3             - 2
                                                                  ft. 3
                                                                      3 UJ UJ Q VO 0       n b 3 D X ot <c                                                                                                      <
                             o r                  ^ s    ^  t-    3
                                                                      > X     CC
                                                                            3 3
                                                                                     u.       d
                                                                                           a 3 v!> 3 >• VJ h                                                                                                    X
                «r     s     °c     <c                                                                        <
                1“ < vj U.                  VD     V)
                                            Z> Z> a a V 5 vd   v>       vn vn UJ     vn O'
                                                                                           X < vn cd
                                                                                                    tft 3 VD H                                                                                                  2
                                                      vS s *• o 2
                                                         uj    V  vn                 UJ                    P
                                            CD >                        UJ                 c               r-
                                                         CC                   sn X   J—       cd Cd O X
                     £ £                    O'                             X                               3 <
                                                  ft. ^ )0 n 3 T J UJ
                                            UJ U <r
                                                   &■
                                                      ^> O to              3 □.  bi dL \n
                                                                                 < <c < Ck_
                                                                                              b D
                                                                                           <r Z) 3 5?
                                                                                                        2 3 ci>                                                                     aj> v>b)                    £>
                                               O O Vo             VJ > Z UJ UJ
                                                                           Lu 3 X X     VJ    3 vn
                                                                                                        >- tz
                                                                                                                                                                                    <£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                J
                                                                                                    S J o vn
                         Animal domestication in the south-west U.S.S.R.          391

to be earlier further east in the Dnieper basin if the evidence for domesticated
horses from Dereivka26 is valid; this site on the middle Dnieper, belonging to
the middle phase of the Dnieper-Donetz culture, is contemporary with Tri-
polye Bi on the Dniester where, so far, no domesticated horse bones have
been excavated from this period. In Figs. 3-6, horses have been included
with wild animals although, as has been mentioned above, those from Mik-
hailovka and the late Tripolye sites may be identified as domesticated animals.




      Notes
       1 Krainov, D. A. (i960). Pescernaya Stoyank Tas Ayir, kak osnova peri-
         odizatsii poslepaleoliticeskikh kultur Krima, Materiali i Issledovaniya po
         Arkheologii, 91. Moscow.
       2 Krainov, D. A. (i960), op. cit. pp. 131-3.
       3 Dimitrieva, E. L. (i960). Fauna Krimskikh stoyanok Zamil Koba II i Tas
         Ayir I, Mat. Issled Arch., 91, pp. 166-87.
       4 Dimitrieva, E. L. (i960), op. cit. p. 173.
       5 Stoljar, A. D. (1959). Ob odnom ceentre odomasnivaniya svini, Sov. Arkh.,
         3-4, PP- 3-i8.
       6 Telegin, D. J. (1961). K voprosu o Dnepro-Donetskoi neoliticeskei-
         kulture, Sov. Arkh., 4, p. 26; Telegin, D. J. (1967). Istoriya piemen
         Dnepre-Donetkulture (5th-3rd mill.), Avtoreferat dissertat. na soisk.
         ucen. Doctora 1st. Nauk. Kiev.
       7 Markeyevic, V. I. (1965). Issledovania neolita na Srednem Dnestre,
         Kratkiye Soobisceniya Inst. Arkh., 105, pp. 85-90. Moscow; Markeyevic,
         V. I. (1968). Neolit Moldavii, Avtoreferat dissertat. na Kand. 1st. Nanka,
         Moscow.
       8 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). Iz istorii goletsenovoi fauni pozvonocnikh v
         Vostecnoi Evrope, Prirodnaya obstanovka i fauni proslovo I, 132, Kiev,
         pp. 119-47-
       9 Pidoplicko, I. G. (1956). Matenale do Vivceniya minulikh faun URSR.
         Kiev. pp. 54-5; Danilenko, V. M. (1952). Priazovskaya ekspeditsiya
         1947 g-j Arkh. Pam. URSR, 4, Kiev, pp. 67-9.
      10 Danilenko, V. M. In discussion at Institute of Archaeology, Kiev, June
         1967.
      11 Telegin, D. J. (1967). ibid.
      12 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). op. cit. p. 132.
      13 Comsa, E. (1959). La civilisation Cris sur le territoire de la R. P. Roumanie,
         Acta Arch. Carpathica, 1 (2), Kracow, pp. 173-84.
      14 Passek, R. S. (1962). Relations entre l’Europe Occidental et l’Europe
         Orientale a l’epoque neolithique, Atti del Congresse ISPP, Rome, pp.
          126-44.
      15 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). op. cit. p. 132.
      16 Passek, T. S. (1962). ibid.; Passek, T. S. and Cernys, E. K. (1963).
         Pamyatniki kulturi linieno-lentocnoi keramiki na territorii SSSR,
         Arkheologiya SSSR, B 1-2, Moscow.
      17 Soudsky, B. (1966)^ Bylany. Prague.
      18 Passek, T. S. and Cernys, E. K. (1963). op. cit. pp. 31-2.
      19 David, A. I. and Markeyevic, V. I. (1967). Fauna mlekopitayuscikh
         poselenia Noviye Rusesti I, Izvestia Akademii Nauk Mold. SSSR, 4,
          Kisinev, pp. 3-26.
      20 Necrasov, C. and Haimovici, S. (1962). Studiul restorilor de fauna
14—DOPAA   *   «
392   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    tringham


         descoperite in 1959 la Traian (D. Vieii §i D. Fintinilor), Materiale, 8,
         Bucure§ti, p. 262.
      21 Passek, T. S. (1962). ibid.
      22 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). ibid.
      23 Pidoplicko, I. G. (1956). op. cit. p. 14.
      24 Passek, T. S. (1962). ibid.
      25 Pidoplicko, I. G. (1956). op. cit. pp. 33-5.
      26 Bibikova, V. I. (1963). op. cit. pp. 14, 132.
      WILLIAM WATSON

      Early animal domestication in China


The bones of domestic animals (or of the animals susceptible of domestica¬
tion) have been excavated on many neolithic sites, but not yet in sufficient
quantities to allow inference as to regional differences or indicate conclusively
a pattern of development in the various neolithic traditions. A detailed
analysis of the animal remains is available for only one place, the Yang Shao
culture site of Pan-p’o in south Shensi, other reports merely naming species
by common terms and giving no statistical information.
  By far the commonest of domestic animals are dogs and pigs, which are
found at Yang Shao, Proto-Lung Shan and Lung Shan sites. Cattle and sheep/
goats have also been identified at sites of each of these types, but are so rare
as to leave the question of complete domestication in doubt1. There is no
reliable report of horse associated with the Yang Shao, but a site in the Fen Ho
valley of south Shensi, with pottery of Lung Shan type, contained bones of
horse2. This site adjoins the upland area where the beginnings of horse¬
raising would naturally be looked for. In Manchuria horse has been identified
in association with pottery of derived Yang Shao type, but of presumed later
date than the Yang Shao culture of the Yellow River valley3. There are
general indications from excavation that the proportions of sheep/goats and
cattle is greater at sites of Lung Shan culture, where the scapulae of both are
frequently found used in a method of divination. This would indicate the
expected trend, the local domestication of these animals falling later than that
of the dog and pig and contributing to the broad differentiation of the Yang
Shao and the Lung Shan traditions.
  The Kansu branch of the Yang Shao culture is now shown to be retarded
by comparison with the development along the Wei River valley and the
middle course of the Yellow River, and certainly continues in local variant
forms as late as the beginning of the Bronze Age in the first half of the second
millennium b.c. The appearance of a majority of sheep/goat bones at sites in
Kansu therefore does not necessarily indicate priority over their appearance
in Lung Shan context farther east, although the nature of the uplands of
Kansu and adjacent regions to west and south-west being well suited to sheep
raising (particularly in the conditions of greater warmth and rainfall indicated
394   Part 111 Regional and local evidence for domestication    WATSON


for the high neolithic period in north China), would incline one to look there
for the earliest domestication4. At Huang-niang-t’ai in Kansu cattle bones
were found as well as those of pig and sheep, but so far this association has
been exceptional for the western branch of the Yang Shao culture5.
  At Pan-p’o in south Shensi, a large village site fully excavated and fully
representative of the developed Yang Shao culture, all the domesticable
species were present6. The domesticated pig was ubiquitous, its bones being
found in nearly every one of the 200+ numbered features of the site. Nearly
all the animals had been killed young, very few bones belonging to individuals
estimated at more than one year of age. The skeletal characteristics fall within
the range of wild Sus scrofa, but they do not come close to wild species
surviving in China, so that there is no presumption in favour of local domestica¬
tion. The dogs (six individuals identified) are small boned with raised fore¬
head, so markedly different from Canis lupus that there can hardly be question
of recent local domestication. Only three sheep were identified, with dental
features suggesting close alliance to the Ovis shangi found at the Bronze Age
capital of Anyang (c. 1650-1027 b.c.) and known as the Yin sheep. Inde¬
terminate bovid and horse were represented by only one tooth apiece. The
very small proportion of the last three specimens in the total of bones found
at the site supports no more than the inference of a beginning of domestica¬
tion, if that, and they can have played only a small part in the Yang Shao
economy. The horse tooth resembles closely that of Przewalski’s horse, to
which are also related all the horses known in the pre-Han period and before
the introduction of superior breeds from the far west.
  Among the wild animals which were hunted by the Yan Shao farmers the
spotted deer (Pseudaxis hortularum) was second only to the pig in frequency;
it is identical with the deer still found wild in north, south and east China.
The roebuck (hornless river deer, Hydropotes inermis), also sufficiently
frequent to imply regular hunting for food, is identical with the surviving
animal, which is now fotmd only in the well-watered terrain on the lower
Yangtze. Its presence at Pan-p’o implies a nearby terrain of pond and marsh,
such as exists no longer, with surrounds of high grass, and a somewhat
warmer climate than that at present experienced in the Yellow River valley.
The bamboo rat (Rhizomys sinensis) is no longer to be found in the vicinity
of Pan-p’o, and its ancient presence is a further indication of warmer weather,
greater abundance of surface water and thickets of bamboo.
  At Pan-p’o was found also evidence of a fowl (Gallus sp.) which may hint
at a beginning of domestic poultry, but that inference needs confirmation.
At a Lung Shan site in Hupei some pottery models of ducks and geese,
accompanying others of sheep, dogs, turtles and fish, put domesticated fowl
almost, but not quite, beyond question. It is perhaps to be expected that this
step in animal husbandry should accompany the adoption or at least notable
expansion in cattle and sheep raising which has been attributed to the Lung
Shan culture and period.
                               Early animal domestication in China      395



Notes
1 Andersson, J. G. (1943). Prehistory of the Chinese, Bull. Mus. Far Eastern
  Antiquities, 15, p. 43; Bylin-Althin, M. (1946). Ch’i Chia P’ing and Lo
  Hant’ang, Bull. Mus. Far Eastern Antiquities, 18, p. 458; T’ung Chu-ch’en
  (1957). The distribution and chronology of neolithic culture in the lower
  courses of the Yangtze and Yellow River, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 2, pp. 7-21.
2 At the site of Kuang-she; see Shou Tien (1957). Discovery of the neolithic
  site at Kuang-she, Wen wu ts’an k’ao tzu liao, 1, pp. 57-9.
3 Hamada Kosaku and Mizuno Seiichi (1938). Ch’ih-feng, Hung-shan-hou.
  Tokyo; LiiTsun-e (1958). Report of an archaeological reconnaissance at
  Hung-shan (Chih-feng), Inner Mongolia, K’ao ku hsiieh. pao, 3, pp. 25-40.
4 Kuo Te-yung (1958). An archaeological reconnaissance in Wei-yiian hsien,
  Lung-hsia-hsien and Wu-shan hsien on the upper Wei river in Kansu
  province, K’ao ku t’ung hsiin, 7, pp. 6-160; Kuo Te-yung (i960). Report
  on excavations of the site of Huang-mang-mang-t’ai, in Wu-wei-hsien,
  Kansu province, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 2, pp. 59-60; Cheng Nai-wu and
  Hsieh Tuan-chu (i960). A brief report of excavations at two sites of the
  Chi-Chia culture at Ho-chuang and Chin-wei in Lin-hsia, K’ao ku, 3,
  pp. 9-12.
5 Chang Yun-p’eng (1956). A short report of archaeological excavations at
  Ching-shan and T’ien-men in Hupei, K’ao ku t’ung hsiin, 3, pp. 11-21.
6 Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of China (1963).
  Hsi-an Pan-p’o. Peking, pp. 255-69.
     .




■■       ■
      WILLIAM WATSON

      Early cereal cultivation in China


As there is no absolute or even developed relative chronology for the neo¬
lithic period in China it is only possible to make broad distinctions in the
early history of cereal cultivation. The exiguous evidence this far available
comes in all cases from excavated levels assigned to comparatively advanced
forms of neolithic culture. The initial phases of neolithic culture in its local
varieties are still poorly defined and there is no argument for associating the
introduction of agriculture closely with the adoption of other characteristic
neolithic practices; nor, among the reported specimens, have any primitive
strains been identified such as to imply an initial stage in local domestication.
The example of Japan, where the pottery-using Jomon culture subsisted for
some six millennia (on radiocarbon evidence) before the arrival of rice as the
first cereal in the second century B.C., suggests that a comparable dislocation
of neolithic techniques may have occurred in China. Apart from the survival
of grain and seeds in archaeological contexts, the wide distribution in China of
characteristic flat stone knives, pierced or notched for hafting and often
abraded, is taken as evidence of grain harvesting, and where they occur in a
full neolithic context, or on sites where grain has been recovered, the inference
appears sound. These knives are distributed mainly along the middle course
of the Yellow River, to the north-east as far as Liaotung, through the eastern
coastal provinces as far south as northern Fukien, and along the Yangtze
valley into Szechwan. The differences in distribution of the main varieties
of the knife, oblong and crescentic, do not coincide with the limits of the main
divisions of neolithic culture as defined in ceramic terms, and so cannot be
related closely to the differences of cultivated grains that are noted below1.
   The terms of the problem are set by the climatic and pedological distinction
between north and south. The primary loess reaches from the north-west
to a limit just south of the Yellow River and as far east as Honan, and beyond
to the coast the soil is formed of the fluviatile extension of the loess. Loessic
soil is on the whole alkaline, poor for holding water, but when water is
supplied to it it brings active constituents towards the surface by capillary
action, and is thus to some extent self-fertilizing. This property must have
encouraged the large size and settled character of neolithic sites in the Yellow
398   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication   WATSON


River valley. The extent of the primary loess coincides closely with the dis¬
tribution of the Yang Shao neolithic tradition. East of Honan and down the
coast from Liaotung to Chekiang is the preserve of the Lung Shan culture,
which in part occupies the redeposited loess but in part also is found on the
terrain characteristic of the lower lying regions extending from the Yangtze
basin southwards. This region is well-watered, with much permanent water,
and has soils of acid type. Towards the south it enjoys increasingly heavy
rainfall. Precipitation is less in the north and less seasonally confined, and
there is a long cold winter.
  The cereals identified in neolithic contexts are millet, rice and wheat. The
first two are preserved in the grain, placed in pots with burials, and rice
survives as husk included in baked clay2. Cultivation on the deep primary
loess requires a cereal able to stand long rainless periods, and the millet
which was the staple of the Yang Shao farmers meets this requirement
admirably. Foxtail millet (Setaria italica var. germanica) and broom corn millet
(Panicum miliaceum) have been identified at Yang Shao sites in Shensi and
southern Shansi3. The dominant position of the millet varieties along the
middle and upper courses of the Yellow River in the neolithic period is fully
established, and they remain an important crop today. The question of
the cultivation of rice in the Yang Shao region and on the primary loess
remains problematic. The difficulty of providing sufficient water on this
terrain might be thought prohibitive, but Oryza sativa was identified at the
eponymous site of Yang Shao Ts’un in Honan4 and it is reported from Liu
Tzu Chen in Shensi6. The context is however doubtful at the first site, and
at the latter, where Setaria italica was recognized with certainty, the identi¬
fication of rice was tentative (“husks resembling rice”). Only at this site has
there been the suggestion of the presence of both cereals. Thus the case for
the cultivation of rice in the context of the Yang Shao neolithic and on the
primary loess is not yet proven.
  Apart from these sites, neolithic rice is reported only from places in the
eastern part of the Yangtze basin (Anhui, Kiangsi, Chekiang, Hupei) in the
well-watered region of southern soil and climate, in each case in a context
of local Lung Shan type6. These sites are believed to be later than the main
Yang Shao Lung Shan development of the Yellow River zone, possibly
little before the beginning of the Shang Bronze Age (c. 1650 B.C.). The rice
husks recovered from baked clay at sites on the Chiang Han Plain, Hupei,
belonging to the same late neolithic period, resemble the Keng sub-species
(Oryza sativa ssp. spontanea Roschev), cultivated at the present day in east
China, differing sharply from the other modern variety, subsp. Hsien Ting,
cultivated in the same region. The neolithic rice is distinguished by the width
of the grain (length to width ratio 2-01) and the prominent fine hairs on the
husk surface and the ridges7.
  Wheat has only once been identified with certainty in neolithic context,
at Tiao Yu T ai in northern Anhui, accompanied by Lung Shan pottery8.
                                          Early cereal cultivation in China   399


In the Shang Bronze Age, to judge from the divinatory texts excavated at
Anyang, wheat was still of minor importance compared with millet. Where
these texts specify the grain, the ideographs used to do so are interpreted in
most cases as varieties of millet (yellow and black). The ideograph for wheat is
securely identified, but appears rarely. There seems to be no instance of the
ideograph interpretable as rice9.
  Regarding kaoliang (.Andropogon sorghum) the position is obscure and
tantalizing. In recent syntheses of Chinese archaeology we read that it was
cultivated both in neolithic times and in the Shang and Chou periods10. For
the neolithic K. C. Chang can only cite Bishop’s statement of 1928, in an
article dealing generally with the neolithic period in north China: “from one
site (Ching Ts’un) grains of Sorghum vulgare have been identified. If these
date in reality from neolithic times, as appears certain, this discovery is of
decided interest; for hitherto it has generally been believed that this valuable
food plant, the kaoliang or ‘grand millet’ of the modern Chinese, was intro¬
duced from India about the sixth century a.d.”11 Other authorities cited base
their conclusion on the interpretation of grain characters in Shang oracle
texts, a process beset with doubt12. Unfortunately the systematic excavations
undertaken on early sites since 1950 have yielded only one identification
of sorghum: the excavators of San Li Tun report that “some stalks of
kac-liang sorghum were also preserved”13, and even here we lack detailed
publication of criteria of determinations, cultural context and the manner of
association.
   In his recent paper Dogett does not entertain the possibility of an intro¬
duction of domesticated sorghum into China so early as the neolithic period.
He doubts also the suggestion made by Burkill in 1953 that it reached China
direct from its African home across the Sabaean lane and not before the
thirteenth century a.d.14 He prefers Ball’s opinion of 1913 that kaoliang,
having some affinities with Indian sorghums, developed from a variety which
reached China from India “some ten or fifteen centuries ago”. This theory
assumes a coastwise spread. In a subsequent verbal communication Dogett
has however allowed that sorghum may have arrived in China earlier,
particularly as it has been recovered in India earlier than the beginning of the
Christian era. The distinct characteristics of the Chinese kaoliangs may, he
believes, have been acquired through hybridization with the native wild
Sorghum propinquum. Sorghums are to be found all through Central Asia.
Thus one must reckon with the possibility that they spread thence into China
at a time early enough to allow for the development of the kaoliangs as a
distinct race15. Meanwhile it is well to suspend judgement on the question
until better excavated evidence is available in China. Dogett accepts a date
for the arrival of sorghum in India between 1500 and 1000 b.c. Even in
Central China neolithic culture may extend in places below the first of these
dates, and Bishop’s report, if substantiated by other finds, would not clash
with the chronology inferred for India.
400   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication    WATSON


  There appears to be no difficulty in accounting for the other sorghum race
found in China: the Amber Canes, Sorghum dochna. These are related to
Amber Canes found spread along the coasts from East Africa around India,
and south-east Asia to China, and their uniformity along the whole of this
route points to a rapid and recent spread16.
  It is not uncommon for seeds of other food plants and fruit trees to be
recovered in excavations. At the site of Ch’ien Shan Yang in Chekiang, in
addition to rice, the following were identified: Prunus persica, Cucumis
melo (gourd), Trapa natans (water chestnut), Arachis hypogea, Sesamum
indicum, Vida faba11. At the large village site of Pan-p’o in Shensi a pot was
found filled with seeds described as edible vegetable. The pollen recovered
at this site has been interpreted as indicating a wide grassy plain around the
village with a scatter of elm, persimmon, and other deciduous trees possibly
providing animal fodder but not human food. Seeds of hazel, pine and chest¬
nut, found at depth on the site, were probably brought from a distance, for
no pollen of the nut trees was found, and the far-carrying pine pollen, though
present, does not necessarily indicate that the trees were near18.
  In sum, the archaeological evidence for the character and distribution of
cereals in China in the neolithic period prefigures not unexpectedly the
modern distribution, with this main difference, that wheat, now become the
main crop in the loessic region from Kansu to Shantung and extending
beyond the loess north-east to Manchuria and at places reaching south
towards the Yangtze, was of minor importance in the neolithic period, when
the staple on the loessic soil was varieties of millet. Today only a compara¬
tively small area grows both wheat and rice, and in early time also it seems that
millet and rice were largely mutually exclusive, this arising no doubt then as
now from difference of terrain and soil rather than climate, and from the
local incompatibility of the field system of each. What is known of the
neolithic cereals reinforces the cultural division recognized on other grounds
between the Yang Shao and the Lung Shan traditions. All that has been said
above must be qualified by the following considerations, apart from the still
unsatisfactorily limited number of determinations on which the broader
inferences are based:

1 The lack of a reliable chronology for the neolithic period. This applies
  even to the relation of the Yang Shao and Lung Shan cultures: these have
  been seen hitherto as broadly contemporary in origins at least in west and
  east respectively, but are now arguable as broadly successive, the Lung
  Shan being the later facies of the Yang Shao, in fully developed form
  coming to occupy exclusively the fluviatile loess as it formed and became
  habitable on the lower Yellow River.
2 There is no archaeological evidence for early cereals in Manchuria,
  Szechwan (both specially favoured for agriculture) and the region of south¬
  east and south China where the ceramic tradition of the so-called “south-
                                           Early cereal cultivation in China     401


  eastern neolithic” persisted very late, and where agriculture also made a
  tardy appearance.
3 The study of the historical pedology and climatology of east Asia is still
  little advanced, and results are hardly available for archaeological inter¬
  pretation.
4 In China archaeologists are denied the evidence provided elsewhere by the
  survival of fossil field systems. As regards rice cultivation progress in this
  matter should prove possible, as the antiquity of existing field systems is
  realized and excavation is undertaken specifically to determine it. There
  has been a presumption in the past that the focus of domestication for
  rice, if it should prove definable, will lie in south-east Asia. The investiga¬
  tion of ancient fields in that area may throw fight on the problem. No
  theory has been expressed as to the geographical origin of domesticated
  millets.



     Notes
       1 An Chih-min (1955). The stone knives of ancient China, K’ao ku hsiieh pao,
          10, pp. 27-51.
      2 The possibility of identifying grain impressions in pottery has not yet
          been exploited. While it can hardly be doubted that evidence of this kind
         must exist, the careful levigation to which the clay is subjected in most of
         the advanced neolithic areas must tend to minimize it.
      3 Yellow River Catchment Archaeological Commission (1959). Brief report
         of archaeological excavations at Liu Tzu Chen, Hua Hsien, Shensi,
         K’ao ku, 2, pp. 71-5; also Anon. (1955). Discoveries at a neolithic village
         —Pan-p’o near Hsi-an, K’ao ku t’ung hsiin, 3, pp. 15-16; Bishop, C. W.
          (1933). The neolithic age in northern China, Antiquity, 28, pp. 389-404;
          Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of China (1963).
         Hsi-an Pan-p’o, Peking, p. 124, pi. LV-LVIII.
      4 Andersson, J. G. (1947). Prehistoric sites in Honan, Bull. Mus. Far
         Eastern Antiquities, 19, pp. 21-2.
      5 Yellow River Catchment Archaeological Commission (1959). ibid.
      6 Hu Yiieh ch’ien (1957). Reconnaissance of neolithic sites in Anhui,
         K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 1, pp. 21-30; Hsieh Ch’un-chu and Chu Chiang (1955).
         Examination of the neolithic site at Hsien li tun in Wu hsi, Kiangsu,
          Wen wu, 8, pp. 48-59; Chekiang Cultural Properties Control Commission
         (i960). Excavations of Ch’ien Shan Yang in Wu Hsing, K’ao ku hsiieh pao,
         2, pp. 73-91; Andersson, J. G. (1946). ibid.; Yellow River Catchment
         Archaeological Commission (1959). op. cit. PP- 7I_5-
      7 Ting Ying (1959). Examination of rice husk found in red baked earth of the
         neolithic period in the Chiang Han plain, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 4, pp. 31-4.
      8 Hu Yiieh-ch’ien (1957). ibid.
      9 Ch’en Meng chia (1956). Yin hsii pu tz’u shu, Peking, pp. 525-32.
     10 Cheng, T. K. (i960). Archaeology in China, II, Shang China, Cambridge,
         p. 197; Cheng, T. K. (1963). Archaeology in China, III, Chou China,
         Cambridge, p. 22; Chang, K. C. (1963). The Archaeology of Ancient China.
         New Haven and London, p. 59.
     11 Bishop, C. W. (i933)- op. cit. pp. 395~6-
     12 For evidence of crop cultivation in the Shang period Cheng, T. K. (i960),
         ibid., cites Yu Sheng-wu (1957). Agricultural products of the Shang
402   Part III Regional and local evidence for domestication        WATSON


         Dynasty, J. Humanistic Studies: Peoples' University of the North East, i,
         pp. 81-107 (not available to the writer); and Wu Ch’i-ch’ang (1937). Yin
         agricultural practices as seen in the oracle records and bronze inscriptions,
         in Studies presented to Chang Chu-sheng, Shanghai, pp. 323-368 (but in
         this there is no mention of kaoliang); Ch’en Meng-chia (1956). ibid., does
         not identify any oracle text character with kaoliang.
      13 Yin Jan-chang and Li Chung-i (i960). Preliminary report on the second
         season of excavations on the site of San Li Tun, Hsin I Hsien, Kiangsu,
         K’ao ku, 7, pp. 20-2; the reference reads: “Being carbonized through
         burning the external appearance of the stalks was well-preserved. They
         were examined by Li Yang-han, Director of the Department of Agricul¬
         ture at the Nanking Institute of Agriculture, and determined as stalks of
         kaoliang from near the roots. Traces of leaves of kaoliang were also dis¬
         covered stratified in the cultural level.” The pottery (ting) and bronze
         knives found on the site indicate a date between the tenth and eighth
         centuries B.c.
      14 Dogett, H. (1965). The development of the cultivated sorghums, in
         Hutchinson, Sir J. (ed.) Essays on Crop Plant Evolution. Cambridge, p. 62.
      15 According to Dogett, H., Personal communication from Sir Joseph
         Hutchinson.
      16 Dogett, H. (1965). ibid.
      17 Chekiang Province Cultural Properties Control (i960). Report on the first
         and second seasons of excavations at the site of Ch’ien-shan-Yang in
         Wu-hsing hsien, Chekiang, K’ao ku hsiieh pao, 2, pp. 84-7.
      18 Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of China (1963). op.
         cit., pp. 270-2.
