      Section 2: Patterns of exploitation




      C. D. DARLINGTON

       The silent millennia in the origin of agriculture


Recent advances in the widely separated fields of archaeology and genetics
lead us to question some of the ideas about the origin of agriculture which
may have earlier seemed most acceptable. One of these is the idea that the
domestication of animals in general preceded the cultivation of plants.
Another is the idea that agriculture arose independently in many different
regions both of the Old World and the New, regions which only later
coalesced. A third is the idea that agriculture began in the easiest way with the
easiest crops, that is with the root crops of tropical regions.
  These ideas have been ably expounded by Sauer, Coon, von Wissmann1
and others. They may now be most critically reconsidered in relation to the
second theory, that of the independent regional origins of crops. The view
that agriculture arose in several places independently follows almost directly
from Vavilov’s theory of crop origins. On a basis of his own expeditions to
Afghanistan, Abyssinia and Mexico, Vavilov2 suggested, in 1926, that every
species of crop plant had been taken into cultivation at a particular centre
which was marked by a recognizable region, usually very mountainous, where
it displayed a maximum of variation today.
  There were some nine of these centres which might seem to have con¬
tributed by fusion to give in the bronze age six main world divisions in the
character of agriculture like those shown for crop plants by Kuptsov3. And
these we might have supposed were independent in origin. The studies of the
last forty years, historical and geographical, have however led us to believe
that Vavilov’s centres of diversity were not so much primary as secondary, not
so much sites of origin as places of development. For example, emmer wheat
and barley had not arisen from wild plants in Abyssinia but in Syria. Sesame
and cotton had not arisen in Afghanistan but in Africa4.
68     Part I Patterns of exploitation   DARLINGTON


     One source of new understanding was in Vavilov’s own later work in the
course of which agricultural and genetical evidence took the place of his
earlier and simpler botanical notions. Another source was in evolutionary
views due partly to Darwin5 and partly to a German geographer Engelbrecht6.
On these views the main evolution of crop plants, unlike that of domesticated
animals, was due to the unconscious selection of the cultivator. The activities
of cultivation, tilling and sowing, reaping and threshing, inherently and
selectively altered the conditions of survival of the crop plant without any
such intention on the part of the cultivator. The crops themselves were in this
way thoroughly transformed in the course of a few thousand seed generations
during which nothing very striking might seem to be happening. These
transformations were silent and unconscious. They took place in parallel in
wheat, rice, maize, hemp and many other crops at different times and in
different parts of the earth.
     One of the most striking unconscious changes arising in this way was the
breakdown in most seed crops of the inbreeding inhibition. This mechanism
of breeding control by genetic incompatibility corresponds in effect to the
incest taboo in man, and is characteristic of the wild ancestors of crop
plants7. Another unconscious change on quite a different scale was the
supplanting of crops by their own weeds. It now appears that crops have been
supplanted in this way whenever they have been carried, as has happened
most obviously in Europe, into new climatic or ecological regions for which
they were constitutionally unsuited8.
     Vavilov’s imprisonment and premature death in 1943 prevented him from
developing this work and above all from seeing its implications in terms of the
dated archaeology and the new genetics which give us the foundation for our
present ideas. What we see today is the decisive evidence (of Braidwood,
Alellaart, Helbaek, and others9) that agriculture in the Old World arose in a
single connected region, a Nuclear Zone, of Anatolia, Iran and Syria before
7000 b.c. And that it arose here at a time when no other region of the Old
World shows evidence of any similar settled life. The question for us is
therefore how agriculture could come into existence about four thousand
years later in India and in Abyssinia with pardy different crops, and in China
at first widi entirely different crops. Could the origin have been independent ?
Or had cultivators moved from the old area to the new areas adopting new
crops as they moved ?
     From the point of view of the crops the answer to this question now
presents little difficulty. The crops could have been carried over by advancing
cultivators in Africa and Asia just as they were over shorter distances in
Europe. Wheat often passed over to new regions unchanged. Hexaploid
wheats seem to have reached India in the third millennium b.c. and China in
the second millennium. Tetraploid wheats came to Abyssinia probably before
the first millennium. But in all the new countries wheat was pardy replaced
by its own weeds, rye, oats, and buckwheat in the northern regions, and in
                            The silent millennia in the origin of agriculture   69

each southern region by its own millets. Gradually in India the division of the
country into three regions, depending on wheat, rice and sorghum has been
stabilized10.
   From the point of view of the land, and the means of migration, it may be
thought that such an expansion of agriculture presents a greater difficulty. In
the Oxus and Tarim basins desert sand has now largely smothered the
routes that would have been followed. We have however the evidence of
former oases on these routes11 and we know that they were used as regular and
important means of communication until the time of the Han Dynasty in
China. The deterioration of vegetation that must be assumed is of course what
we should expect to have followed grazing by the animals of the passing
farmers as well as of the intruding pastoral nomads12. Both the peasant and
the herdsman evidently spoilt their habitats and hence spoilt the prospects for
later generations.
   The passage of crops and stock across central Asia damaged the vegetation
and effectively closed the road which the first passage had opened. Similarly,
the passage of cattle and men across central Africa to the Cape promoted those
diseases of cattle and men which again effectively closed the road that their
passage had opened. In a word, the unexampled movements of the neolithic
expansion seem to have led to reactions which interrupted the movements
themselves and broke the world up into the isolated fragments of later ages,
those same geographical regions described by Kuptsov13.
   These views of crop evolution in quite a different sense bear on the problem
of the evolution of man himself. We know how closely primitive peoples
identify themselves with their crops and stock. We also know how closely they
are adapted to meeting the needs and exploiting the gifts of those plants and
animals. We may see examples in Galton’s14 (1853) or Raglan’s15 accounts of
the pastoralist in Africa and in Freeman’s account16 of the rice grower in
Borneo. The processes by which these different types of human being have
evolved may now be seen as connected with the unconscious selection by
which their crops and stock have also evolved. Men, crops and stock had
become overwhelmingly and continuously dependent on one another for their
survival. Their fitness was therefore an integrated property and their relation¬
ship reciprocal. In the silent millennia during the expansion of agriculture the
men themselves were transformed by the new relations with the plant and
animal world which they themselves were in process of establishing17.
   The evolution of man, crops and stock in these millennia was thus, I
suggest, a matter of mutual selection, a kind of process in animal and plant
adaptation where all parties to the transaction effectively modify one another.
The characters it produces are all stable when fixed in position, but unstable
when new factors are introduced into the situation. The hybridization of
cultivators and hunters would be the most universal of these new factors
during the expansion of agriculture. It would also be indispensable for
adaptation to new climates. And it evidently gave rise to new genetic
70   Part I Patterns of exploitation    DARLINGTON


combinations, new races with new habits of living, such as those long recog¬
nized in neolithic and bronze age Britain.
   The appearance of many new types of men making use of many new crops
and stock made possible expansions of the new combinations from the
Nuclear Zone. Each combination, like all races of men and animals, naturally
had its own ecologically favoured habitat and different combinations certainly
moved at different speeds. Pastoralists always covered the ground faster than
setded cultivators and even, in Africa, went in different directions18. Different
types of people thus sorted themselves out.
    One of the new differences of type that were sorted out was that between
grain and root farmers. How profoundly contrasted were the selective and
evolutionary effects of these two ways of working and living may be seen from
considering what happens today. The grain farmer, especially if he works in a
temperate climate and with a temperate calendar, depends for his success on
tilling and manuring the soil, sowing the seed, weeding and protecting the
crop, reaping the harvest, thrashing, winnowing and eventually storing the
grain. This success depends in turn on his own skill and forethought and on
what he has learnt from the inventions of his ancestors. If he neglects or
mistimes or otherwise falls short in any of these operations, failure and
famine are the penalty that he and his progeny pay. On the other hand he may
make improvements in managing or choosing his crop or his soil, in fashioning
or using his tools, his hoes, sickles or riddles, and in fixing the calendar for the
days and seasons of his work. In all these things his success brings a higher
yield, and hence a greater prosperity for a larger population; and if his
children are intelligent enough to learn from him they will propagate a more
diligent and more skilled population.
    By contrast the root farmer can and need do very little to improve his lot.
He cannot select his seed for he grows his crop direct from the roots. He can
find improved roots in the wild. With great yams, sweet potatoes and bananas
(which are in the same case, for they must be seedless) this is just what he has
done. With manioc too he can devise means of extraction of the toxic principle.
But having done these few things he can go no further. Nor is he much en¬
couraged to do so for with these crops Nature takes care of everything for him.
    Of course Nature can fail. So the potato farmers in Ireland discovered in
1846 when they could be partly saved from starvation only by imported
foreign grain, grain which they did not themselves know how to cultivate19.
But the vast extension of root and banana farming in the tropics shows us that
the simplest and easiest methods have been able to propagate and preserve
great populations in India, Africa, South America and Polynesia. These
populations fed and prospered on the root crops distributed from South¬
east Asia. But that great distribution and expansion came only during the
last 2000 years after grain growing had been brought to South-east Asia from
the Indus valley. It was later and it was derivative.
    Summing up: it was the industrious and prudent grain farmer whose
                            The silent millennia in the origin of agriculture   71


expansion created the peasant communities of Europe, Egypt, India and
China (as well as of Mexico and Peru) on which the great civilizations seem to
have been based. Root cultivation, on the other hand, as Burkill puts it20, in
relation to manioc, “advances that part of the population which contributes
least to the common good”. Easy cultivation does not select for either fore¬
sight or industry. That seems to be why South-east Asia was not a centre of
origin of agriculture.
   While the great expansions of crops and stocks were being prepared
certain industrial experiments were being promoted and chains of reaction
were being set in motion by the new grain crops. They present a problem
first enquired into by Braidwood, Oppenheim and others21. For example, fruit
growing could lead to the fermentation of wine which could be contained and
kept in gourds. But it did not lead to any wider development. Barley, on the
other hand, used as the basis of malting and hence of the brewing of beer,
would lead to the production of yeast which in turn could be applied to the
baking of bread made from the flour of bread wheat which had been ground
in stone querns and kneaded into dough. And the use, first of flat stones, and
then of ovens, for baking this bread could be connected with the invention of
pottery and the smelting of ores. All the more so because both of these,
together with bread wheat, seem to have had a single district of origin on the
northern side of the Nuclear Zone, in Anatolia, and to have arrived much
later on the southern side, in Palestine.
   If we assume a single origin for pottery as well as for agriculture, the later
distribution of pottery also sets us an important problem. Pottery is
useful or indispensable in the preparation and preservation of most human
foodstuffs. It is particularly useful in the preparation of grain by boiling as
opposed to baking. The materials for its manufacture are also almost universal.
This is perhaps why the making of pottery has repeatedly spread from its
centre of origin in the Nuclear Zone deep into Asia and Africa far outside the
area of grain growing. It has been carried, like pastoralism far in advance of
agriculture itself and by hybridization it has often passed into the hands of
otherwise largely palaeolithic people.
   Owing to their joint or integrated adaptation, the genetic possibilities that
we can expect from particular kinds of crops, stock and men are, I suggest,
somewhat precise. For this reason their behaviour, their movements and
their evolution are precisely limited. They have their rules, and if we bear in
mind that these rules are all connected many conjectures which seem beyond
examination may become useful working hypotheses.


      Notes
       1 Coon, C. S. (1954). The History of Man. New York and London; Sauer,
         C. O. (1952). Agricultural Origins and Dispersals. New York; Wissmann,
         H. von. (1957). Ursprungsherde und Ausbreitungswege von Pflanzen und
4—DOPAA   *   *
72   Part I Patterns of exploitation    DARLINGTON


         Tierzucht und Ihre Abhangigkeit von der Klimageschichte, ErdeKunde
          ii, pp. 81-94 and 176-93.
      2 Vavilov, N. I. (1926). Studies on the origin of cultivated plants, Bull. App.
         Bot., 16 (2), pp. 139-248.
       3 Kuptsov, A. (1955). Geographical distribution of cultivated flora and its
         historical development, Bull. All Union Geog. Soc., 87, pp. 220-31.
      4 Burkill, I. H. (1953). Habits of man and the origins of the cultivated plants
         of the Old World, Proc. Linn. Soc., 164, pp. 12-42; Harlan, J. R. and
         Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and barley, Science, 153,
         pp. 1074-80; Harris, D. R. (1967). New light on plant domestication and
         origins, Geog. Rev. (N.Y.), 57, pp. 90-107; Hutchinson, J. B. (1962).
         History and relationship of the world’s cottons. Endeavour, 21, pp. 5-15;
         Vavilov, N. I. (1950). The origin, variation, immunity and breeding of
         cultivated plants, Chron. Bot., 13, pp. 1-366.
      5 Darwin, C. (1868). Animals and Plants under Domestication. London.
      6 Engelbrecht, Th. (1916). Uber die Entstehung einiger feldmassig ange-
         bauter Kulturpflanzen, Geog. Z., 22, pp. 328-34.
      7 Darlington, C. D. (1943). Genetics and the evolution of the mating system
         in man, Ann. Eug., 12, pp. 44-5.
      8 Darlington, C. D. (1943). Chromosome Botany and the Origins of Cultivated
         plants (2nd ed.). London.
      9 Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960). Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
         Kurdistan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilisation, Oriental Institute,
         Chicago, 31; Helbaek, H. (1959). Domestication of food plants in the Old
         World, Science, 130, pp. 365-72; Helbaek, H. (1966). Commentary on
         the phylogenesis of Triticum and Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20, pp. 350-60;
         Mellaart, J. (1967). Catal Hiiyiik. London.
     10 Burkill, I. H. (1953). ibid.
     11 Wissmann, H. von. (1957). ibid.
     12 Darling, F. Fraser (1956). Man’s ecological dominance through domesti¬
         cated animals on wild lands, in Thomas, W. L. (ed.) Man's Role in chang¬
         ing the face of the earth. Chicago.
     13 Kuptsov, A. (1955). ibid.
     14 Galton, Sir F. (1853). Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa.
         London.
     15 Raglan, Lord (1939). How Came Civilisation? London; Raglan, Lord
         (1962). Prehistoric Men—what can we know of them. Rat. Annual,
         pp. 31-41.
     16 Freeman, J. D. (1955). Iban Agriculture. London.
     17 Darlington, C. D. (1963). Psychology, genetics and the process of history,
         Br.J. Psych., 54, pp. 293-8; Darlington, C. D. (1967). The genetics of
         society as “human society and genetics”, in Kuttner, R. E. (ed.) Race and
         Modern Science, New York; Darlington, C. D. (1969). The Evolution of
         Man and Society. London.
     18 Payne, W. J. A. (1964). The origin of domestic cattle in Africa, Emp.J.
         Exp. Agric., 32, pp. 97-113.
     19 Woodham-Smith, C. (1962). The Great Hunger. London.
     20 Burkill, I. H. (1951). The Greater Yam in the service of man, Adv. Sci., 7,
         pp. 443-8.
     21 Braidwood, R. J. et al. (1953). Did man once live by beer alone?, Amer.
         Anthrop., 55, pp. 515-26; Hartman, L. F. and Oppenheim, A. L. (1950).
         On beer and brewing techniques in ancient Mesopotamia, J. Amer. Or
         Soc. Suppl. 10.
      KENT V. FLANNERY

      Origins and ecological effects of early domestication
      in Iran and the Near East

      Introduction
Late in the Pliocene period there began a series of movements of the earth’s
crust, which caused the central plateau of Iran to be drawn closer to the stable
massif of Arabia. The land between, caught in the grip of these two far-
heavier formations, was compressed and folded into a series of parallel
mountain ridges or anticlines. Gradually the centre of this compressed zone
collapsed and subsided, so that the parallel ridges, trending from north-west
to south-east, appear to rise out of it like the successive tiers of a grandstand,
eventually reaching the Arabian and Iranian plateaus to either side. The
sunkland in between, still settling and filling with the erosion products of the
mountains, became the rolling and irregular plain known as Mesopotamia; the
parallel ridges to the east of it are the Zagros Mountains1.
  The result was an area in which altitudinal differences produce a great
number of contrasting environments in a relatively limited geographic area—
a mosaic of valleys at different elevations, with different rainfall, temperature,
and vegetational patterns. Like some of the other areas where early civiliza¬
tions arose—Mesoamerica and the Central Andes, for example—the Near
East is a region of “vertical economy”, where exchanges of products between
altitude zones are made feasible and desirable by the close juxtaposition of
four main environmental types: high plateau (c. 5000 ft.), intermontane
valleys (1500-4000 ft.), piedmont-steppe (600-1000 ft.), and alluvial desert
(100-500 ft.). A similar pattern arose in the Levant, where the same late
Pliocene tectonic movements produced the great Jordan Rift Valley, flanked
by the wooded Lebanon-Judean mountains and the arid Syrian Plateau. It
was in this kind of setting that the first steps toward plant and animal domesti¬
cation were made.
74   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY




      Stages in Near Eastern prehistory


In a recent article, Frank Hole and I have divided the prehistory of Western
Iran into three main adaptive eras2. The first was a period of semi-nomadic
hunting and gathering, which lasted until roughly 10,000-8000 b.c. The
second era we have called the period of early dry-farming and Caprine
domestication, and it seems to have involved predominantly emmer wheat
{Triticum dicoccum), two-row hulled barley (Hordeum distichum), goats
(Capra hircus), and sheep (Ovis aries). This period lasted until about 5500
b.c., and its hallmarks are already familiar to members of this symposium:
permanent villages, early hornless sheep, goats with medially-flattened and/or
helically-twisted horn cores, and cereal grain samples which show a mixture
of wild (tough-glumed, brittle rachis) and domestic (brittle-glumed, tough-
rachis) characteristics. The third adaptive era was one which involved the
previously-mentioned cultivars plus bread wheat (Triticum aestivum); six-
row barley which might be either hulled or naked (Hordeum vulgare); lentils;
grass peas; linseed; domestic cattle (Bos taurus); pigs (Sus scrofa); and
domestic dogs (Canis familiar is), and featured irrigation in those zones where
its use was feasible without elaborate technology. This era culminated, in the
lowlands at least, in the rise of walled towns, about 3000 b.c.3
  There is no reason to believe that the entire Near East went through these
eras synchronously; in addition, evidence suggests that each of the cultivars
may have appeared earlier in some areas than in others. Nevertheless, with
these caveats in mind, I find this framework useful enough so that I will
follow it in this paper, and apologize in advance for viewing the rest of
South-western Asia through Iranian eyes. The stages are, it should be
emphasized, ones of farming adaptation: they imply nothing about level of
social and political development. They allow, in other words, for the simul¬
taneous existence of tiny four-acre villages in Kurdistan and immense, 32-
acre sites like £atal Huyiik in Anatolia.
  The basic argument of the paper is as follows. An important change in
subsistence pattern, midway through the Upper Palaeolithic in the Near East,
set the stage for domestication of plants. This shift, which represented a
trend toward “broad spectrum” wild resource utilization, continued long
after cultivation had begun. In this sense, our Western view of early cultiva¬
tion as a drastic change or “improvement” in man’s diet is erroneous, as is the
frequently-cited notion that early agriculture gave man a “more stable” food
supply. Given the erratic nature of rainfall in south-west Asia, the era of
early dry-farming was still one of unpredictable surpluses and lean years,
with considerable reliance on local wild products. I suggest that early caprine
domestication, apart from its food aspects, represented a way of “banking”
these unpredictable surpluses in live storage, analogous to the use of pigs by
Melanesian peoples4 or the exchange of imperishable, exotic raw materials
            Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   75


which characterized early village farmers in Mesoamerica5. Early irrigation
modified this pattern, and also aggravated environmental destruction to the
point where the return to a wild resource economy would have been nearly
impossible. It also set the stage for both dramatic population increases in the
lowlands and “ranked” or stratified societies in which a hereditary elite con¬
trolled the small percentage of the landscape on which the bulk of the food
was produced. A bit of indulgence on the reader’s part will be required by the
fact that in a paper of this length only the meagrest documentation can be
offered for these points of view.


         Prime movers and subsistence change


A basic problem in human ecology is why cultures change their modes of
subsistence at all. This paper, while not relying on the facile explanation of
prehistoric environmental change, is hardly destined to settle that problem.
The fact is, however, that for much of South-west Asia we have no evidence to
suggest that late Pleistocene or post-Pleistocene environmental changes forced
any of the significant subsistence shifts seen in the archaeological record. I will
therefore use, as one possible mechanism, a model of population pressure and
disequilibrium relative to environmental carrying capacity, drawn from
recent enthnographic data on hunting and gathering groups.
  A growing body of data supports the conclusion, stated with increasing
frequency in recent years, that starvation is not the principal factor regulating
mammal populations6. Instead, evidence suggests that other mechanisms,
including their own social behaviour, homeostatically maintain mammal
populations at a level below the point at which they would begin to deplete
their own food supply. The recent conference on “Man the Hunter”, held at
Chicago in 1966, made it clear that this is probably also true of human
populations on the hunting-gathering level7. In addition, a number of current
ethnographic studies indicate that, far from being on a starvation level,
hunting-gathering groups may get all the calories they need without even
working very hard8. Even the Bushmen of the relatively desolate Kalahari
region, when subjected to an input-output analysis9, appeared to get 2100
calories a day with less than three days’ worth of foraging per week. Pre¬
sumably, hunter-gatherers in lusher environments in prehistoric times did
even better. This is not to say that palaeolithic populations were not limited
by their food supply; obviously, they were. But in addition, they engaged in
behaviour patterns designed to maintain their density below the starvation
level.
  What, then, would persuade a hunter-gatherer to modify his subsistence
pattern significantly—for example, to adopt agriculture ? In the course of this
paper I would like to apply the equilibrium model recentiy proposed by
Binford10 as a means of explaining post-Pleistocene changes in the archae¬
ological record. This model will be used to offer tentative explanations for
76   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


subsistence changes which took place in the Near East at the three critical
points mentioned in the start of this paper: the Upper Palaeolithic, the
beginning of domestication, and the beginnings of irrigation.
   Binford, drawing on both Birdsell and Wynne-Edwards, postulates that
prehistoric hunting populations, once reasonably well-adapted to a particular
environment, tended to remain stable at a density below the point of resource
exhaustion. He argues that their adaptation would change only in the face of
some disturbance of the equilibrium between population and environment.
Two kinds of disturbances might take place: either (1) a change in the
physical environment which would bring about a reduction in the density of
chosen plant and animal foods, or (2) a change in demography which would
raise local human populations too close to the carrying capacity of the
immediate area. The first kind of disturbance might be reflected in the
palynological record; the second might be reflected in a shift in site density
and settlement pattern in the archaeological record. Disturbances of both
kinds occurred in the prehistoric Near East, but it is perhaps the second kind
which is most useful theoretically, because it does not rely on the deus ex
machina of climatic change, an event which does not seem to have taken place
with sufficient frequency to explain all (or even most) prehistoric cultural
changes11.
   Binford points out that, even in the hunting-gathering era, certain areas
supported higher populations than others because of their high level of edible
resources. Butzer12 makes the same point, singling out the “grassy, tropical
deciduous woodlands and savannas; the mid-latitude grasslands; (and) the
lower latitude Pleistocene tundras” as having the optimal carrying capacity
for hunting-gathering populations. In the case of the Near East, for example,
it would appear that the mixed oak woodland of the Levant Coast supported
higher upper palaeolithic populations than some of the treeless inland steppe
areas, at least where survey has been comparably extensive. One sees, therefore,
a mosaic of “optimal” habitats, with a somewhat higher carrying capacity and
population density, separated by “less favourable” habitats with a somewhat
lower carrying capacity and population density. Binford argues that one source
of stimulus for culture change is the cyclical demographic pressure exerted on
these marginal habitats by their optimal neighbours. It is the optimal habitats
which are regional growth centres; it is in them that populations rise, followed
by buddings-off and emigrations of daughter groups before the carrying
capacity has been strained13. They are the “donor systems”; the marginal
habitats are the “recipient systems”. And it is in the marginal habitats that the
density equilibrium would most likely be periodically disturbed by immigra¬
tions of daughter groups, raising populations too near the limited carrying
capacity. Thus Binford argues that pressures for the exploitation of new food
sources would be felt most strongly around the margins of population growth
centres, not in the centres themselves.
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   77




      The ubroad spectrum” revolution

The first change I would like to deal with took place in the upper palaeolithic
period, before 20,000 B.C., and amounted to a considerable broadening of the
subsistence base to include progressively greater amounts of fish, crabs, water
turtles, molluscs, land snails, partridges, migratory water fowl (and possibly
wild cereal grains in some areas ?).
   The Upper Palaeolithic of the Near East has a number of chronological
phases and regional variants, from the “Antelian” and “Kebaran” of the
Mediterranean Coast14 to the “Baradostian” and “Zarzian” of the Zagros
Mountains15. Its environmental context in the coastal Levant may have been
an open Mediterranean woodland not unlike today’s16, while the Zagros
Mountains seem at that time to have been treeless Artemisia steppe17. In both
areas, hunting of hoofed mammals accounted for 90% of the archaeological
animal bones, and when weights of meat represented are calculated, it appears
that ungulates contributed 99%18. In the Zagros, archaeological settlement
patterns suggest that the basic residential unit was a “base camp” composed
of several families, which shifted seasonally; from this base, hunting parties
made periodic forays to “transitory stations”, vantage points from which they
stalked and eventually killed game, which was then cut up into portable
sections at temporary “butchering stations”19. There are indications that a
similar pattern may have characterized the Levant. On the basis of multi¬
variant factor analysis of flint tools, Binford and Binford20 have described the
various living floors of Rockshelter I at Yabrud as brief “work camps” made
at varying distances from a base camp, sometimes for hunting, sometimes for
processing plant material. Near the Wadi Amelias, where Ksar Akil was
presumably the “base camp”, Ewing21 describes “hunting sites on the
surface higher up in the mountains”, some of which may be analogous to the
transitory stations or butchering stations of the southern Zagros.
   Midway through the “Antelian” or “Baradostian” phases, one can see the
aforementioned trend toward increasing use of small game, fish, turtles,
seasonal water fowl, partridges, and invertebrates—the latter including
terrestrial and marine snails, freshwater mussels, and river crabs. It would be
oversimplified to view this as a “shift from large to small game”, for even at
late palaeolithic sites, ungulates contributed 90% of the meat supply. The
trend is rather from exploiting a more “narrow spectrum” of environmental
resources to a more “broad spectrum” of edible wild products. This “broad
spectrum” collecting pattern characterized all subsequent cultures up to
about 6000 B.C., and I would argue that it is only in such a context that the
first domestication could take place. It is a pattern in which everything from
 land snails (Helix sp.) to very small crabs (Potamon sp.), and perhaps even
 cereal grasses, was viewed as potential food. It was also accompanied by a
 number of “pre-adaptations” for early cultivation.
78   Part I Patterns of exploitation    flannery


    One of these was the development of ground stone technology. At sites like
 Ksar Akil in Lebanon22 and Yafteh Cave in Iran23, small coarse grinding
 stones occasionally appear; abraders are increasingly common in later Zarzian
 sites in the Zagros, where they come to include grooved rubbing stones.24
 Evidence suggests that these implements were at first used mainly (but not
 necessarily solely) for milling ochre. However, the ground stone technology
 was there, and when man eventually turned to the cereal grasses, he had only
 to adapt and expand a pre-existing technology in order to deal with grain
 processing.
    Still another “pre-adaptation” for what was to follow can be detected in the
 later stages of the Palaeolithic in the Near East: the development of storage
 facilities, which are not at all well-represented in earlier phases. In the
 Zarzian level at Shanidar Cave, for example, “several pits . . . which may
 have been storage pits” are reported by Solecki25. These features increase
 with time; many sites of the period 9000-7000 b.c. are reported to have
 subterranean pits, e.g. Zawi Chemi Shanidar26, Karim Shahir27, and
Mureybat28. Some were plastered, evidently for storage, e.g. at Ain Mallaha29,
while others may have been used for roasting grain over heated pebbles, e.g.
at Mureybat30. In any event, these subterranean pits seem to be a feature of
the broad-spectrum collecting era, and would presumably have been more
effective for storing or processing invertebrate or vegetal foods (snails, acorns,
pistachios, etc.) than for any activity connected with ungulate hunting.
    It seems unlikely that the shift to a broad spectrum pattern was a direct
result of environmental change. It is true that the earlier Pleistocene “big
game” of the Near East—elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, and so on—
had vanished, but as pointed out by Howell31, these species disappeared mid¬
way in the Mousterian period, that is, many thousands of years before we can
see any substantial increase in the use of fish, invertebrates, and (possibly)
vegetal foods. Moreover, use of these latter foods is more striking in some
areas than others. For example, in the Levant area none of the Mount Carmel
caves shows much in the way of invertebrate foods32, while “thousands” of
Helix snails are reported from Ksar Akil in the Wadi Amelias33. In the Zagros,
certain caves like Palegawra34 have more abundant remains of snails, mussels,
and crabs than do those in other areas; we recovered virtually no land snails
from our Khorramabad Valley caves35.
   Regional variations like those mentioned above suggest that Binford’s
model of disturbed density equilibrium may not be far wrong: pressure for the
use of invertebrates, fish, water fowl, and previously-ignored plant resources
would have been felt most strongly in the more marginal areas which would
have received overflow from the expanding populations of the prime hunting
zones, raising their densities to the limit of the land’s carrying capacity. At this
point they would tend to turn, I suggest, not to small mammals—which do not
appear to be a very secure resource anywhere in the Near East—but to those
smaller resources which are readily and predictably available in some quantity
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   79


at certain seasons of the year. These are water fowl, fish, mussels, snails, and
plants. Many of these resources are storable, and though small, are not to be
scoffed at. Land snails, for example, although less rich in protein than
ungulate meat, are actually much richer in calcium36, especially in limestone
mountain regions, since they use lime to synthesize their protective mucous37.
Mussels supply vitamin A and acorns and pistachios are very high calorie
foods, much more so than wild game38. Present data tentatively suggest that
the “broad spectrum revolution” was real, that it was nutritionally sound, and
that it originally constituted a move which counteracted disequilibria in
population in the less favourable hunting areas of the Near East. Once
established, however, it spread to and was eventually taken up even by the
favourable areas. And one other aspect of it might be noted: the invertebrate
(and vegetal ?) foods involved are ones which could easily have been collected
by women and children, while the men continued ungulate hunting. The
broad spectrum collecting pattern may therefore have contributed to the
development of division of labour in the late Pleistocene and early post-
Pleistocene era.



      Early dry farming
      The environmental context of early domestication


The “broad spectrum” revolution set the cultural stage for domestication,
and with the close of the Pleistocene the oak woodland belt expanded over the
upland Near East, even into areas of the Zagros which had formerly been tree¬
less steppe39. This “optimum” wild resource zone, which includes the densest
stands of edible nuts, fruits, and wild cereal grasses had apparently been
present in the Levant throughout the last glaciation40, but was now available
over a much wider area.
   A number of environmental characteristics of this zone today (which
presumably have characterized it since the Pleistocene drew to a close) should
be mentioned here, for they are variables which affected man’s use of the
region and set the environmental stage for domestication. Low average
precipitation inhibits dense forest growth, but cool, moist air from the
Mediterranean in winter results in enough rain (or snow) to guarantee some
spring growth of edible grasses and legumes. Hot, dry air circulating out of
Eurasia in the summer (plus even hotter local winds off Arabia) produces a
prolonged rainless period which inhibits the growth of perennials; most of the
vegetation thus consists of annuals which have a peak growing season in
March or April, after which they must be harvested in a three-week period.
This set the seasonal collecting pattern. Further, like most arid or semi-arid
regions, the zone has a low vegetation diversity index41, which means that
certain species (like wild cereal grasses) may form nearly pure stands. This is
8o   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


true of the fauna as well; while the number of mammalian species is low
(relative to wetter areas), many of these are species which tend to form herds,
e.g. sheep, goat, gazelle, and onager. Harlan and Zohary42 have discussed the
implications of the nearly-pure cereal stands, and Reed43 has considered the
pre-adaptive role of “herd behaviour” in the ungulates which were first
domesticated.

      The origins of cultivation


The beginning of cultivation is a second shift which may have taken place in
the less favourable valleys and wadis around the periphery of the zone of
maximum carrying capacity.
   For many years it was assumed, quite logically, that domestication must
have begun in the zone where the wild ancestors of the domesticates are most
at home. Then, in an eye-opening paper, Harlan and Zohary44 revealed that
“over many thousands of hectares” within this zone “it would be possible to
harvest wild wheat today from natural stands almost as dense as a cultivated
wheat field”. Harlan45 then proceeded to do just that: armed with a flint-
bladed sickle, he harvested enough wild wheat in an hour to produce one kilo
of clean grain—and the wild grain, after chemical analysis, proved to be
almost twice as rich in protein as domestic wheat. Harlan and Zohary46 there¬
fore closed with a warning: “Domestication may not have taken place where
the wild cereals were most abundant. Why should anyone cultivate a cereal
where natural stands are as dense as a cultivated field ? . . . farming itself may
have originated in areas adjacent to, rather than in, the regions of greatest
abundance of wild cereals.”
   Harlan’s wild wheat harvest also suggested that a family of experienced
plant-collectors, working over the three-week period when wild wheat comes
ripe, “without even working very hard, could gather more grain than the
family could possibly consume in a year”47. Such a harvest would almost
necessitate some degree of sedentism—after all, where could they go with an
estimated metric ton of clean wheat ?
   This was, of course, what archaeologist Jean Perrot48 had been saying for
years about the Natufian culture in Palestine—that they had been semi-
sedentary, based on intensive wild cereal collection. A further suggestion of
this nature has since come from Tell Mureybat, a site on the terrace of the
Euphrates River in inland Syria, dating to c. 8000 b.c. Preliminary analyses
of carbonized barley and einkorn wheat from pre-pottery levels at the site—
which have clay-walled houses, grinding stones, and roasting pits presumably
used to render the cereal glumes brittle for threshing—suggest that the grain
may be all wild49. Such data indicate that sedentary life based on wild cereal
collecting and hunting may be possible, and that consequentiy pressures for
domestication may not be as strong in the heart of the wild cereal habitat as
elsewhere.
          Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   81


   This impression is reinforced by the fact that some of our most ancient
 samples of morphologically domesticated grain (e.g. emmer wheat) come from
 “marginal” habitats well outside the present wild range of that plant; for
example, in the Wadi Araba region50 and the Khuzistan steppe51, in areas
 where dense stands could only be produced by deliberate cultivation. It is
possible, therefore, that cultivation began as an attempt to produce artificially,
around the margins of the “optimum” zone, stands of cereals as dense as those
in the heart of the “optimum” zone. Binford had already suggested that this
might have taken place in response to population pressure exerted on the
marginal habitats by expansion of sedentary food-collectors from the heart of
the wild cereal zone. It appears that efforts at early cultivation were probably
soon reinforced by favourable mutations in the cereals themselves, such as
toughening of the rachis, polyploidy, and loss of tough glumes.
   The spread of the early dry-farming complex across the Near East is
striking; where surveys are adequate, it appears that very few environmental
zones were without farming communities at this time, although population
densities were higher in some areas than others. In the Zagros Mountains,
densities of sites are highest in intermontane plains with a high sub-surface
water table and frequent marshy areas52, suggesting that a critical resource
sought by early farmers were lands of high water-retention, where soil
moisture helped the planted cereals to survive annual fluctuations in rainfall.
At Ali Kosh on the lowland steppe of south-west Iran, early farmers planted
their cereals so near swamp margins that seeds of club-rush (Scirpus) were
mixed in with the carbonized grain samples53. This is analogous to the
practices of early farmers in parts of arid highland Mesoamerica, who also
utilized permanently-humid bottomlands and high-water table zones54. Such
types of farming may also have facilitated the spread of agriculture out of the
Near East and into Europe, which took place sometime during this time
period.
   More complicated techniques accompanied the extension of early dry¬
farming to its limits in very marginal habitats to the north-east (e.g. the
Turkoman steppe), and the south-west (e.g. the Wadi Araba region). At
Beidha, in the south Jordan desert, it is possible that farming sites were
located in such a way as to take advantage of rainfall run-off concentrated by
steep nearby cliffs56. On the Turkoman steppe, early cultivators used small
“oasis” situations where streams from the Kopet Dagh formed humid deltas
along the base of the mountain range56. In all such cases, where rainfall
agriculture must have been pushed to its absolute limit, barley seems to have
been the main crop57; otherwise, wheat was preferred.

     A detailed look at the early dry-farming diet


In archaeology, one concrete example is often worth more than a whole
chapter of generalization. At this point, I would therefore like to present in
82     Part I Patterns of exploitation         flannery


some detail our dietary data from the site of Ali Kosh, a small early dry¬
farming village on the Khuzistan steppe of south-western Iran58. Excavations
at Ah Kosh produced c. 45,000 carbonized seeds, which on analysis by
Helbaek (n.d.) could be grouped into 40-odd species of plants; it also pro¬
duced more than 10,000 identifiable bones from approximately 35 species of
animals. I have listed only the most common categories in Table 1. In

                             TEPE ALI KOSH (7500-5600 B.c.)
(“'Erruner wheat                                     Caper
(“'Two-row barley, hulled                            Pistachio

(“'(Rare traces of other cultivars)                  Gazelle
                                                     Onager
(“'Goats                                             Pig
(“'Sheep                                             Aurochs

  Small wild legumes (Astragalus, Trigonella,        Fox (and other small mammals)
    Medicago)                                        Miscellaneous birds
  Wild two-row barley                                Ducks and geese
  Goat-face grass (Aegilops)
  Ryegrass (Lolium)                                  Water turtles
  Wild oat grass (Avena)
  Canary grass (Phalaris)                            Fish (carp, catfish)
  Vetchling (Lathyrus)
  Shauk (Prosopis)                                   Freshwater mussels


Table 1      Most common foods recovered in debris at Ali Kosh, an early
        village in the plain of Deh Luran, south-western Iran.(W
     (a) Domesticated items.
     (b) See Helbaek, H. (In press). Plant-collecting, dry-farming, and irrigation agriculture in
         prehistoric Deh Luran, in Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. Prehistory and
         human ecology of the Deh Luran plain, Memoirs, Univ. of Michigan, Museum of
         Anthropology; See Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The prehistory of south¬
         western Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33 (9), pp. 147-206.


addition, I have estimated the pounds of usable meat represented by
minimum individuals of each type of animal, using the system proposed by
White59 and adult weights taken from Walker60 and my own field notes
(Table 2). A further chart (Table 3) gives average representative nutritional
values for some of the important plant and animal foods at the site, taken from
Platt61, plus some estimates of the amount of each food source needed to make
a kilogram.
   Three periods of the early dry-farming era were represented at the site of
Ah Kosh. These have been called the Bus Mordeh (7500-6750 B.c.), Ali Kosh
(6750-6000 b.c.), and Mohammad Jafifar (6000-5600 b.c.) phases62. Counts of
the animal bones and carbonized seeds by species will be given in the final
reports on the site63. I can present here only an abbreviated summary of the
results.
  The subsistence pattern in the earliest, or Bus Mordeh phase, had five
main aspects: (1) the cultivation of cereals, whose grains amounted to only
             Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication                                                                         83



                                                                                                         Tf                         Tf
                      0 i     3 4cd-»                                         in in       rt*        TfCQ      Tt*                  O      a
                                        O    O 0            O O               6 6         6          mom                            6      o
                                        0    in 0           in in                                                                          <D
N _                               g     M                   <N cn   I « I                                                                  Oi
PQ w                 ^       p          M         M                                                                                       V i
                                                                                                                                           d
<        £                                                                                                                                .d
00       d
        *d                                                                                                                                ‘5b
W ft                                                                                                                                      *C
                                                                                                                                           o
ft 33
W es                         ft §       Tf 00 00                                          M     |    w \Q      <S    Tt Tf                 a
                       6 °l
                     • c-H              Tf                                                                                                 >>
                       a d >
                     • ■—1 a ;g                                                                                                           T3
                              a                                                                                                            <u
                                                                                                                                           N



                     *M      0)                                                                                                in
                      O           M                                                                                            M VO
                             O    Co
                                                                      in              M Tf           Tf 00
                                                                                                        ON                  O     in       cd
                      *>1 6             On O O O               O VO   M O             6 6 n ' '                           m 6 6           1
                                                               M N
                     W p G              O in O O
                                        O      CO              N
                                                                      cr> M
                                                                                                         01                                d
                                                                                                                                           cd
13 u
^ 3                                                                                                                                       T3
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                          ,o
-S’ ft                e           -i
                      g°p               O 00
                                             M
                                                  Tj- (N       m (S o m <s            M   M     <S   M   t"-              Tt* cr>          d
                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                          •H
                                                                                                                                           u
                     I si                                                                                                                  cd
                                                                                                                                           >

                                                                                                                             in            <L>
                                                                                                         Tt*              in m m           bD
                     Cm jj                                            in                  00         00 00                N p co           cd
                                                                                                                                           4-*
                      O
                         3        cd
                                  <u
                                        O     O       9        0 VO   cn                             6 6             m    <n   6    6      d
                      hfi cd
                     1 j CO       g
                                        in r^ O
                                        in    M
                                                      0
                                                      tj*
                                                               M <N   M
                                                                                      I 6 I                                                <D
                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                           u
J3                   a d                <s M (S       cs                                                                                   4>
GO
 n                                                                                                                                         a
Oj 00
bz cd                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                            cd
                                                                                                                                           ■M
                                                                                                                                          m<D
                             ft   p
                                        M    On N vo                                                                 ^    mvo             >r3
                             °l
                             6 >
                                        O m m
                                                                           I "I I "I                                 ^ Tj-^vo              (L)
                                                                                                                                          ^d
                             g j-g                                                                                                        +-»

                                a                                                                                                          00
                                                                                                                                           d


                                                                                                        Tj-               in         N     d
                      O      r-H r:
                                                                                                     00 M                 (N        vo     o
                              n cd      m o in O              O                                       6 6      1     n         1     6
X!
                                        ^  O (N O
                                        rs Tt* in <n                       I I I I I I                                                    Vm
<D
T   3                am                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                          T3
O                                                                                                                                          O
%
CO                                                                                                                                         <u
p                            ft §                                                                                                          B
                                        On vo     m co                                                                              CT)
m                    |        °-p       X}- M
                                                                                                                     00   On

                      s      o' >                           I "I "I I I II                                                          M

                             a ;T3
                     §                                                                                                                     ro
                                                                                                                                          VN
                                                                                                                                          ON

                                                                                                                                                      <u
                                                                                                                           in in
                                                                                                                     in in OO
                        . P       iu                                  in      in in w     Tt-        Tt" M     hN N O O                    -r 00I
                      “ s a             in m in o           o o m rt o 6 6 6 6                       M 6 6 6              000
                                                                                                                                           (L)
                     \4 p c             <s   (S
                                                  M
                                                      o in t"- w
                                                      Tf (S
                                                                                                                                          .d vo
                                                                                                                                          *d     on
                                                                                                                                                 ro

                                                                                                                                                      C/5   O
              TP                                                                                                                           (U    p4
               <L)                                                                    9 CO l/N           N           UN vn o        o
              S 33 J3 o                 OOOOOOvoOnO                                   66hm6h666o
              ,Sa PP .SP
                      5i!ti             vr> i/n vn o
                                             O O M Ti¬
                                                ro 00       in m                                                                                 00
                                                                                                                                           cd
              W
                                                                                                                                           3 5
                                                                                                                                           Si
                                                                                                                                          in a
                                                                                                                                           o s
                                                                                                                                          T3 ^
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                          ■s s
                                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                                                                           n 5
84   Part I Patterns of exploitation                                                                                    FLANNERY



                                                                              xi                                         ed cd cd *3.g 13g Id1 co                                    g
                                                                                                                         111 c                   1                                   s
                                                                     WWW d

                                                                    .3 .3 9 CO
                                                                               CO            <u
                                                                                             <D                          Had cd              cds 3 I?                                o
                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                     o3 rt rj
                                                                                             CO
                                                                           r? O
                                                                               3
                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                         w a 1,1 I) 1> tU
                                                                                             O          u
                                                                     be be. -a               O
                                                                                             O
                                                                                                        ko
                                                                                                        bO               <u u <u d a d
                                                                                                                         d d d o o o
                                                                                                                                                        <L> '



                                                                          8O <4H
                                                                           O ^               O
                                                                                                                 0 o         4
                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                                         C*_| C4_| Cm   O
                                                                        o o                  O            o o                     A!              O     h

                                                                                             O            »/■> o 0 0 0 >no o O t) tl -d
                                                                    mmin                                o      o                   n co
                                                                    ro Tf (N                            co N
                                                                                                                         IOIOIONO
                                                                                                                 N N N w N
                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                  VlO-tl


                                                                    -H-H-Hh                  A          A -U -H ti¬                                                  rf- Tt-



                                                        cd o
                                                        4-*
                                                                                                        I I I I I I I I I II I I I                                                   «u
                                                        >u
                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                        'g P                   o o                                                                                                   C   J
                                                        4
                                                        Cd
                                                        -»                     8 °                      I § I I I I I I I I I II                                                     ‘a
                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                        ><                                                                                                                                           N




       Estimated value per kilogram of edible portion
                                                                                                                                                                                                    C/D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cd
                                                        Od o
                                                           bo       In o o
                                                                    m t h ^
                                                                                             o
                                                                                             (N
                                                                                                        OOvovovovoOOOO>oOOO
                                                                                                        ^Tffr>(s<N<smfnm(SMHHMO                                                                     <u
                                                        £ g                                                                                                                                         H


                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                                                                                     C/5

                                                        B                                                                                                                                            O
                                                        3           O     O 0 0              0          0     O O         O   O    O    O    O    O     O       O O      O O         .O
                                                                    O
                                                                    m     vo0 0              0
                                                                                             00         0     O O         M   M    w    O    O    O     O       *n O     O O
                                                        a g               CO        M
                                                                                    M
                                                                                                        VO    Tf
                                                                                                              M M
                                                                                                                              M    M    M    M    M             M O
                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                                         >/*> »/">
                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                     « H
                                                                                             M                                                                                         O


                                                                                                                                                                                      <u
                                                                                                                                                                                     J   3
                                                                                                                                                                                         cd
                                                                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                                                         <L>
                                                                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                     0000                               OOO
                                                                     o    00   onvo                     00    vo rs                                I     I      I    °    I    &
                                                                     r- vo *r\ Tf                       VO    M W                   I   I


                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                                         <U




                                                                     OOOO
                                                                                             »/->
                                                                                                        ^>    00000000000^0
                                                                                                        h-tONOvOvON^tTfTfinhH N (N
                                                            « B      M    N    M    M                                                                                                .Q
                                                        Ph be                                                  1
                                                                                                              </>   /^                  M    M    M     ft")                             cd

                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                     VO
                                                                                                                                                                                      ON



                                                                                                                                                                                     00        Q
                                                            a> ^
                                                                     h
                                                                          O O O
                                                                          n    ct in         81
                                                                                                        0000 O O O O O _O _
                                                                                                        N     O     O VO
                                                                                                                          O O O O
                                                                                                                               r- VO              ■ “
                                                                                                                                        Ov av On Tf On vo                00    O
                                                                                                                                                                                             . 00
                                                            si       l-l M N N               (S         H     N     N H



                                                                                                                                                                                     1*
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pi N
                                                                                                                                                                                     ►> 2>
                                                                                                                                                                                     X) co
                                                              <1>                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                     8 .$>
                                                              •co    O  0
                                                                        On
                                                                               O
                                                                               Ov
                                                                                    O
                                                                                    CO
                                                                                             O
                                                                                             m
                                                                                                         O O O OOO
                                                                                                        00 VO r- vrv On »tn
                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                             <S
                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                  (S
                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                            0 O 0 O
                                                                                                                                                            On On vo O               r-4> >-tX)
                                                                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                     $ CO      CO   ON       CO         00 N >/->       "t              O    O    0         co r- ON
                                                                                                                                                                                     M Co
                                                              13     CO CO     co   (N       CO          co vo VO M M M                 <N   <S   (S     CO w
                                                              U                                                                                                                      cn ^
                                                                                                                                                                                     A! “
                                                                                                                                                                                     2 S
                                                                                                                                                                                     2 §*
                                                                                                                                                  <u
                                                                                                                                                  X                                   d°^
                                                                                                                                                  *-»                                 o ~
                                                                                         X               cd
                                                                                                                                                   8            <u
                                                                                                                                                                a>
                                                                                                                                                                                     T3 'ts
                                                                                                                                                                                          «U

                                                                                                                                                                O                         n r«-
                                                                                    si“J-                                               u XJ                                          PQ to
                                                              Id     cd    >>* >>— PISS’S 5                                    o.rd <L>SP (jo                   CO

                                                                     r;    u   C    W                                                                           (J    £ x
                                                                     k rt i> <3 h                                                       3 3               be 3        3 -
                                                                     ^ PQ _) ^ CO                   £         £^OwOO<P£QHfc^
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   85


about 3% of the carbonized seeds, but because of their greater size constituted
perhaps a third of the total weight of plant food; (2) collecting of small wild
legume seeds of clover-alfalfa type, which constituted about 94% of the
carbonized seeds, but amounted probably to no more than a third of the total
weight of plant food; (3) collecting of the seeds of wild grasses, constituting
only about 1% of the carbonized seeds and about 15% of the weight of plant
food; (4) herding of domestic goats and sheep, whose bones constituted about
67% of the faunal material, but which contributed only about a third of the
total weight of meat represented (see Table 2); (5) hunting of wild ungulates,
which accounted for only 25% of the animal bones, but contributed more
than 60% of the total weight of meat.
   The remainder of the food supply was made up by elements such as nut
meats, fruits, small mammals, fish, water fowl, and mussels, which although
nutritionally important constituted a small percentage of the total weight of
meat and plant food. Unfortunately, in the absence of coprolites, we have no
way of calculating what percentage of the diet was made up by plant foods and
what percentage was meat. It appears, however, that the Bus Mordeh villagers
ate a good deal more meat than the average modern Iranian peasant; Watson64
reports that animal bones are “rather rare” on village dump heaps today.
   Nowadays, as May65 points out, “most Iranian meals are of the one-pot
type”, with many ingredients thrown in, such as grain, lentils, meat, onions,
etc. This may also have been true prehistorically—at least during the later
part of the dry-farming era, when cooking pots are known. The early cereals
(emmer wheat and two-row hulled barley) are largely unsuitable for bread¬
making, and their grains seem to have been pounded up and eaten right along
with fragments of the woody spikelet base66. A lack of scorched or carbonized
bone suggests that most meat was cooked after it had been cut off the carcass,
or else boiled; there is little evidence to indicate direct roasting of the meat
while still on the bone. Thus, it is possible that a typical meal of the early
dry-farming era consisted of a gruel of cereal grains, spikelet bases, wild
legumes, and chunks of ungulate meat cooked up together.
   During the three periods represented at Ali Kosh, the only significant
change in meat resources seems to have been an increase of sheep relative to
goats; hunting was just as important when the site was abandoned as when it
was founded. On the other hand, the changes in plant species percentages
through time are more striking. They reflect (1) increases in cultivated cereal
grains, (2) decreases in the use of local wild legumes, (3) increases in crop
weeds, and (4) increases in plants typical of fallowed agricultural land (see
below). In Tables 2 and 3 I have added comparative data from a nearby
site, Tepe Sabz, which was occupied during the later era of simple irrigation
farming (5500-3700 B.C.).
   In terms of total food supply, hunting and wild plant collecting were not
“supplements” to the Bus Mordeh diet; they were major subsistence
strategies. Most of the total weight of meat and plant foods of this period came
86   Part I Patterns of exploitation   flannery


from wild resources. These resources had been available throughout the
preceding Upper Palaeolithic period, and some of them (e.g. aurochs meat,
pistachios, small wild legumes) are intrinsically richer in calories, protein (or
both) than most of the domestic foods eaten in the Bus Mordeh phase. In this
sense, there is no reason to believe that the early “food-producers” were
significantly better nourished than their “food-collecting” ancestors. Nor was
their subsistence base necessarily more “reliable”; attempts at dry-farming in
the Deh Luran plain today meet with failure two or three years out of every
five67.
   The one real advantage of cereal cultivation is that it increases carrying
capacity of the land in terms of kilograms per hectare. Dry farming of wheat
in northern Khuzistan, for example, yields an average of 410 kilos per
hectare68. This is equal to the weight of usable meat from sixteen sheep, or the
weight of more than 400 million small legume seeds. There is probably no
other food in the Bus Mordeh phase debris which will produce as many kilos
from so small an area as the cereals. Cultivation thus represented a decision
to replace the native, high-protein wild legume ground cover with a lower-
protein grass which would grow more densely and probably was less work to
harvest, in spite of the risk of crop failure.

      Nutritional aspects of early dry-farming in Iran


Still another fact which emerges from an examination of Tables 1-3 is that
the early farmers of south-western Iran were still in the “broad spectrum”
era: they made a living by diversifying their subsistence strategies, rather than
concentrating on one food source. In fact, the synergistic effect of their
various food combinations—ungulate meat, grasses, legumes, nut meats,
mussels and so on—probably resulted in better nutrition than would special¬
ization on a narrower range of products.
   Highest on the fist of calorie-producing foods used at Ali Kosh and Tepe
Sabz were the almonds and pistachios, followed by cereal grasses and wild
legumes. The wild legumes, judging by analyses of Trigonella69, seem to have
been higher in protein than most other food sources. Most calories probably
came from these plant foods, since none of the meat sources (with the possible
exception of pig) has a very high caloric value.
   Minerals like calcium came from a variety of foods: mussels, water turtles,
fresh water crabs, almonds, and pistachios. The mussels, pistachios, and
various of the wild legumes are also good vitamin A sources. (It is interesting
to note, however, that all these calcium-vitamin A sources probably became
insignificant once the milking of domestic animals was established—an event
for which we still have no archaeological evidence.)
   None of the foods fisted in Table 3 is a decent vitamin C source; the fruit
of the wild caper (Capparis) probably filled this role. Other sources existed in
the environment, and probably were used, although it cannot be proved
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   87


archaeologicaUy. These include fresh ungulate liver, the fruit of the jujube
tree (Zizyphus), and the growing shoots of Medicago and other wild legumes70.
In short, combinations of the twenty or so major foods used by the early dry
farmers probably left them far better nourished than today’s Iranian villager.71

     Cropping, herding and erratic rainfall in the dry-farming era


One aspect of dry-farming in western Iran—or elsewhere in the Near East,
for that matter—is that its outcome is unpredictable. Our figure of 410 kilos
per hectare for northern Khuzistan is an average; in a good year the yield
might be 1000 kilos, in a bad year almost nothing.
   We have already mentioned the hazards of dry-farming in the Deh Luran
plain. Watson72 gives roughly similar figures for Iranian Kurdistan, where
annual rainfall is higher (but still erratic). There a farmer may plant 300
kilos of wheat, and if the rain comes on time and in sufficient amounts, he
might even get a ten-fold yield (3000 kilos). On the other hand, Watson’s
informants lost their entire wheat crop in 1958, 1959, and i960 because of
insects. What early farmers needed, therefore, was a way of levelling out the
years of unpredictable bumper crops.
   Primitive peoples, in the prehistoric record and in the ethnographic
present, seem to use three main methods for dealing with unpredictable
surpluses. They can store them; they can convert them into craft items of
imperishable, exotic raw materials, which can be used as media of exchange
during lean years73; or they can convert them into live storage, i.e. domestic
animals, which can be used either directly (as food) or for inter-group ex¬
changes which set up reciprocal obligations and maximize sharing during lean
years74. These second two alternatives amount to a kind of “banking” of
surpluses75.
   While early farmers in Mesoamerica relied fairly heavily on exchanges of
exotic raw materials76, the early Near Eastern farmers seem to have used
mainly storage and domestic animals. Sheep and goats, for example, may be
purchased with agricultural surpluses in good years, then exchanged for grain
in lean years. They may be allowed to graze on growing cereal grain fields in
good years77, and at some time periods were fed stored or surplus barley78.
Archaeological and ethnographic evidence suggest that plant cultivation and
animal herding, far from being two separate subsistence activities, are inter¬
related in ways which help “bank” surpluses and even out the erratic fluctua¬
tions of the Near Eastern environment.

      Effects of early cultivation on the wild plant cover


One effect of cultivation was an extensive alteration of the native plant cover
of areas like the south-west Iranian steppe, which may actually have prevented
a return to previous food-gathering patterns.
88   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


   We have mentioned already the heavy dependence of Bus Mordeh phase
farmers on local wild plants between 7500 and 6750 b.c. Nine-tenths of the
seeds identified by Helbaek from these levels were from small annual legumes
and wild grasses native to northern Khuzistan. Most abundant were the
clover-like legumes Medicago (wild alfalfa). Astragalus (spiny milk vetch), and
Trigonella (a small plant of the pea family, related to fenugreek); but they also
collected oat grass (Avena), Bermuda grass (Cynodon) and Canary grass
('Phalaris). However, these wild plants have the same general growing season
as wheat and barley, which the Bus Mordeh people cultivated, and they also
compete for the same alluvial soil with low salinity which the cereals require.
As cultivation of wheat and barley increased, therefore, these wild legumes
and grasses assumed the status of weeds, and were removed to make way for
cultivated grains.
   Their place did not remain unfilled for long, however—what happened was
that new crop weeds from the mountains were introduced, probably in
imperfectly cleaned batches of grain brought down to the steppe. These
included various strains of Aegilops (goat-face grass), Lolium (ryegrass), and
other grasses. Once established, the newcomers proved stubborn; Adams79
reports that today ryegrass is one of the major crop weeds requiring eradica¬
tion in the Mesopotamian lowlands.
   One of the native plants which did not compete with the cereal crops was
Prosopis, a woody perennial legume with an edible pod, related to the
mesquite plant of the American West. Adams points out that Prosopis
matures in a different season of the year from the cereals, and its deep root
system survives even after ploughing. This woody wild legume may therefore
even increase along with cultivation and fallow land, and Helbaek has in fact
detected an increase in Prosopis seeds through time through three periods at
Ali Kosh. Evidently the early cultivators responded in a reasonable way: as
Prosopis increased, they ate more of it.
   Fallowing practices also modified the landscape in other ways. Today in
Khuzistan, three-fourths of all arable land is fallow during any given year.
Helbaek’s study of carbonized seeds from the Mohammad Jaffar Phase at Ah
Kosh indicate that by c. 6000 b.c. such fallowing systems were already
taking their toll of the previously dominant grasses and legumes, which were
increasingly being replaced by pasture plants like mallow (Malva), plantain
(Plantago), fumitory (Fumaria) and bedstraw {Galium).
   The tiny annual legumes retreated to the margins of the cultivated land
and the talus slope of the mountains. Their role as a major human food was
played out by 6000 b.c. But they were not forgotten or ignored; they became
food for sheep and goats. Today, from Iran west across the Near East, and
even as far as the Tuareg Country of North Africa80, Astragalus and Trigonella
have become two of the most common plants collected as fodder for domestic
caprines. Man continues to derive energy from them, but through an animal
converter.
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication     89




      Early irrigation farming

      Origins of irrigation


Irrigation may be yet a third example of an innovation which took place in a
less-favourable habitat adjacent to an area of population growth. Our earliest
evidence for this new technology comes not from the well-watered uplands of
Kurdistan and Luristan, where early dry-farming was so successful, but from
the lowland steppe of Khuzistan, a treeless plain receiving only 300 mm. of
annual rainfall.
   There is some reason to believe that the Khuzistan steppe was, indeed,
receiving overflow populations from the mountain woodland. One line of
evidence is the aforementioned field weeds in early levels at Ali Kosh—
including Aegilops and Lolium, which are more at home in the mountains than
on the steppe. The implication is that the whole complex, both cereals and
field weeds, came into the steppe from the uplands. Another line of evidence
is the strong resemblance of steppe artifact assemblages to those in the
mountains81.
   Although survey has been far from exhaustive, what we know of the
Zagros region at that time does suggest that population densities were higher
in the large intermontane valleys than on the steppe82. Under conditions of
rainfall agriculture, the carrying capacity of the steppe is limited, soil salinity
is an ever-present danger, and considerable fallowing is required. Parts of
the steppe, however, had great potential for irrigation: areas like the upper
Khuzistan plains, where “increased surface gradients and widespread under¬
lying gravel deposits provide sufficient natural drainage ... to minimize the
problems of salinization and waterlogging that usually attend irrigation
agriculture”83. Once irrigation appeared, the steppe greatly increased its
carrying capacity and became, in fact, the dominant growth centre of the
Zagros region between 5500 and 4000 b.c. Yet, interestingly enough, this new
mode of production did not spread rapidly out of south-west Asia as earlier
systems of dry-farming had: it seems to have been a peculiarly Near Eastern
development.
 - Early irrigation on the lowland steppe was accompanied by a shift in
settlement pattern84. Instead of locating sites near the margins of swampy
areas, where the high water table could be used to ameliorate fluctuations in
rainfall, some villages now occurred in linear arrangements along fossil
stream courses from which water could be drawn by small, shallow canals.
Table 4 fists the major plant and animal food sources from Tepe Sabz, an
early irrigation site in south-western Iran.
   Archaeological evidence for early irrigation comes from a variety of
approaches. It was Adams85 who first pointed out that there were alignments
of later prehistoric sites in Khuzistan (5500-3500 b.c.) which seemed to
90    Part I Patterns of exploitation       flannery


                               TEPE SABZ (5500-3700 b.c.)

(“'Emmer wheat                                    Shauk (Prosopis)
<“'Two-row barley, hulled                         Caper
(“'Bread wheat                                    Pistachio
(“'Einkorn wheat                                  Almond
(“'Six-row barley, hulled
<“> Six-row barley, naked                         Gazelle
(“'Linseed                                        Onager
(°) Lentils                                       Pig
(“'Grass peas

(“'Goats                                          Fox (and other small mammals)
(“'Sheep                                          Miscellaneous birds
(“'Cattle

  Goat-face grass (Aegilops)                      Water turtles
  Ryegrass (Lolium)
  Vetchling {Lathyrus)                            Fish


Table 4. Common foods recovered from Tepe Sabz, in the plain of Deh
            Luran, south-west Iran.16)
 (a) (Domesticated items.
 (b) See Helbaek, H. (In press). Plant-collecting, dry-farming, and irrigation agriculture in
      prehistoric Deh Luran, in Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. Prehistory and
      human ecology of the Deh Luran plain, Memoirs Univ. of Michigan, Museum
      of Anthropology.


follow such water courses south into the zone where rainfall alone is in¬
adequate for cultivation. Implications of the settlement pattern were that
irrigation, consisting of the simple breaching of the natural levees of small
streams flowing at the surface of the plain, enabled prehistoric farmers to
partially counteract the erratic and frequently inadequate rainfall of the
steppe. A similar survey by Wright86, recently undertaken in the vicinity of
Ur, shows that Ubaid baked-clay sickles and sickle fragments found on the
land surface tend to be restricted to a band five kilometres wide to either side
of fossil stream channels, giving us an estimate of the area watered by the
small canals serving the fields.

      Ecological effects of irrigation


Irrigation in Khuzistan, according to Adams87 tends to increase crop yields
from 410 kilos per hectare to 615 kilos per hectare. In addition, the actual
physical size of the crop plants themselves seems to have been increased. For
example, Helbaek’s studies suggest that seeds of flax or linseed (Linum
bienne) grown by rainfall alone have a maximum length range between
3-29-4-03 mm., while irrigated flax has a maximum length range of 4-39-6-20
mm. Flax seeds of this large size do not appear in the Deh Luran deposits
until 5500-5000 B.c., after which they are present in large numbers88.
However, as many authors have already pointed out, irrigation if unaccom¬
panied by proper drainage may bring salt to the surface through capillary
action in areas which were not previously saline. Agriculture then necessitates
         Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   91


a strategy in which the advantages of irrigation water are weighed against soil
salinity. One strategy employed in the lowlands of Iran and Mesopotamia was
to concentrate on barley, which has a shorter growing season and higher salt
tolerance than wheat. It is no accident that barley and sheep (see below), with
their relatively greater ability to withstand the rigours of the hot, dry, saline
lowland steppe and alluvium, were among the most important food resources
of Elamite civilization89.
   One by-product of irrigation was that the canal became a new semihumid
niche on which specialized plants could be grown, apart from those which the
water was originally intended to irrigate. It is known, for example, that
onions and date palms were grown on canal banks in early historic times in
Mesopotamia90. Unfortunately, the canal vegetation is also served as a haven
for crop pests such as the bandicoot-rat (Nesokia indica) which otherwise
would have been less abundant in the region.

      Sheep versus Stipa: a by-product of the origins of wool


An interesting chain of events followed the domestication of Ovis orientalis, an
animal which still roams the foothills and intermontane plains of the Zagros
and Taurus ranges in herds of up to fifteen individuals. These sheep have a
coat which is reddish-buff above, white below, and is little different from that
of a deer or gazelle. The coat is composed of hair from two kinds of follicles:
“primaries”, which produce the visible coat, and “secondaries”, which pro¬
duce the hidden, woolly underfur91.
   In the wild, these sheep use a number of wild grasses as forage. One of the
best of these is a plant known as Stipa, or “feathergrass”, which grows over
much of the area from the Khuzistan and Assyrian steppes to the high
mountains of the Iran-Iraq border. Many species of Stipa are classed by
Pabot92 and others as among the better forage species in terms of nutrition.
Stipa has a rather interesting seed implantation mechanism: the seed has a
sharp callus, which easily penetrates the soil, and a number of short stiff hairs
which oppose its withdrawal. The bent and twisted awn of the seed, which is
hygroscopic, serves as a driving organ, twisting and untwisting with changes
in humidity. Thus, over a period of alternating wet and dry days, the feather¬
grass seed literally “screws itself into the ground”.
   Now, to set the stage, let us domesticate Ovis orientalis in the Zagros area
sometime between 9000 and 8000 b.c. It appears (at the present state of our
knowledge) that the first genetic change following domestication was the
loss of horns in some sheep, probably females. One hornless sheep specimen
is known from the Bus Mordeh phase in the Deh Luran plain of Iran,
dating to about 7500 b.c.93, and others are known from early villages near
Kermanshah, Iran and in Anatolia94. A later change, and one still not radio¬
carbon dated95, was the appearance of wool in domestic sheep, which we
know took place prior to 3000 b.c.96 Ryder97 has shown that this was brought
92   Part I Patterns of exploitation   FLANNERY


about when the “secondary” follicles increased in number and changed their
spacing, causing the “underfur” to become the principal component of the
sheep’s coat.
   It has long been known that sheep survive high temperatures and desertic
conditions better than most other domestic animals. Recent studies by
Schmidt-Nielsen98 and his associates suggest that this is due to a number of
factors: a “panting” mechanism which “permits an efficient ventilation of the
upper respiratory tract, where most of the evaporation takes place”99 and also
—believe it or not—their wool. Thermometers were used to measure the
internal, skin-surface, and outer-wool temperatures of sheep exposed to
extreme conditions of heat and sun. It was observed that while the wool
temperature reached 87°C, skin temperature remained at 42°C; in other
words, “4 cm. of wool sustained a gradient of 45°C between tip and skin”100.
It appears that while wool acts not only as a reflection to divert light and heat
rays, but also as a layer of insulation which allows air circulation to cool the
skin without exposing it to the sun. There may thus be some adaptive
advantage for woolliness in domestic sheep maintained in captivity in hot
climates, especially if they are deprived of a chance to spend the mid-day
hours in the shade of a thicket, as they do in the wild. (Obviously, however,
the extreme degree of woolliness in modern breeds is an artificial condition
maintained by man, since feral sheep rapidly lose it.)
   One of the side-effects of this process becomes apparent when woolly sheep
are allowed to graze in meadows of Stipa: the feathergrass seed catches in the
wool and often, through the same process of wetting and drying with which it
plants itself, may burrow right into the animal’s skin, causing considerable
discomfort and even infection101. In some parts of Iran today, for example,
shepherds even avoid taking their flocks into areas dominated by this plant102,
which must have been one of the most useful foods of the hairy wild sheep.
Such little ecological chains of events give us some idea of how complex the
whole process of domestication must have been.

     Effects of changing land-use on sociopolitical structure


An interesting relationship appears when one plots the increasing population
of prehistoric Iran against today’s figures for different kinds of land use, as I
have done in Table 5. It would appear that while early dry-farming and
irrigation were pushing population densities up at a rapid rate, the relative
amount of land which could be considered “prime”, or “highly productive”
was decreasing with equal rapidity. Let me explain.
   Hole and I103 have already presented estimates of population densities for
parts of south-western Iran during the prehistoric era. These estimates are
based on numbers of sites recovered by our surveys and those of Adams104,
using figures of approximately 100 persons per 1-hectare village site, and so
on; it is presumed that whatever inaccuracies are present apply equally to all
             Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication   93


    O'




         %




                PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL LAND SURFACE TO WHICH
                "MOST-PRODUCT!VE"TECHNIQUE CAN BE APPLIED

Table 5  Inverse ratio between population growth and percentage of total
     land surface to which “most productive” technique (hunting-gathering,
     dry-farming, early irrigation) could be applied at various stages of
     Iranian prehistory.

periods, so the general shape of the population growth curve should be reason¬
ably reliable. Briefly, our estimates go from o-1 persons per square kilometre in
the late Palaeolithic, to 1-2 persons per square kilometre under conditions of
early dry-farming, and up to 6 or more persons per square kilometre after
irrigation appears in the archaeological record. In other words, population
increased at least sixty-fold in the space of about six thousand years.
   Now consider the figures given by May105, which are based on the 1956
94   Part I Patterns of exploitation   flannery


Iranian Census, plus studies by FAO-WHO and the U.S. Foreign Agricul¬
tural Service. First of all, these studies indicate that a very large part of Iran—
about 65%—is taken up by nearly uninhabitable deserts and lands of ex¬
tremely marginal productivity. These may have been used by late Palaeolithic
man, but surely it would have been the other 35% which provided him with
the best hunting-gathering opportunities; included in the latter would be the
intermontane plains of the limestone mountain area and the great winter
grasslands of northern Khuzistan. These zones had the wild game, as well as
the edible fruits, grasses, and legumes which supplied its sustenance and
presumably also man’s.
   Begin dry-farming, however, and the picture changes; for only 10% of
Iran’s land surface is considered “arable”106. This means that although
population increased by twenty times, most of its food was now produced on
one-tenth of the land surface. And with the start of irrigation the ratio changed
drastically again; today, only 10% of the arable land in Iran, or 1% of the
total land surface, is irrigated (and that includes large areas irrigated today by
underground chain wells or qanats, for which we have no evidence in pre¬
history; the area over which stream or canal irrigation can be practised is even
smaller). Add to this the fact that in any one year three out of every four
hectares of arable land are fallow, and it appears that a very small area feeds
many millions of people. In fact, the irrigated 1% of the country produces
30% of the yearly crop107.
   Such an inverse ratio between population and “most productive” land
characterized other areas where early civilizations arose—Mesoamerica, for
example. As Palerm and Wolf108 have suggested, early agriculture in Mexico
and Guatemala probably depended on rainfall alone; but as time went by,
increasingly more productive techniques arose, such as flood-water farming,
canal irrigation, dams, and chinampas or “floating gardens”. As these tech¬
niques appeared they were “applicable to an ever-decreasing number of
areas”109. The area over which the most productive techniques could be
applied was miniscule relative to Mesoamerica as a whole—yet such areas fed
millions of Indians.
   Perhaps the most important consequence of the inverse ratio is that it set
the stage for social stratification. As May110 has pointed out, one of the salient
characteristics of Near Eastern agriculture is what he politely calls “inequit¬
able systems of land ownership and tenure”. It is not just that 100% of the
food is produced on 10% of the land; it is the fact that in some cases 1% of the
population owns the 1% of the land which produces 30% of the food. This
kind of differential access to strategic resources, including the means of
production, is at the heart of “ranked” or “stratified” society. It is not a
result of agricultural success, or “surplus”, but a product of the widening gap
between the size of the population and the size of the critical land surface on
which it was most dependent. It is probably no accident that highly stratified
societies followed this adaptive era in the alluvial lowlands of the Near East.
           Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication    95



       Conclusions

  Like many semi-arid mountain regions, the Near East is a mosaic of woodland
  or parkland areas, relatively rich in wild products, surrounded by steppes or
  grasslands which are less rich in wild products. The changes leading to
  intensive food production are here viewed as a series of responses to dis¬
  turbances of density equilibrium in human populations around the margins
  of the favoured areas, caused by the fact that those areas were the zones of
  population growth and emigration. Obviously, a definition of “favourable”
  depends on the technological level at the time: i.e. hunting, wild plant
" collecting, early dry-farming, or early irrigation.
      Recent ethnographic studies do not indicate that hunters and gatherers are
  “starving”, or that starvation is the major factor limiting their populations.
  Nor does the archaeological record in the Near East suggest that the average
  Neolithic farmer was any better nourished than the average Palaeolithic hunter.
  Moreover, over much of the Near East, farming does not necessarily con¬
 stitute a “more stable” subsistence base or a “more reliable” food supply.
  The real consequence of domesticati on was to (1) change the means of pro¬
 duction in society, (2) make possible divisions of labour not usually character¬
 istic of hunter-gatherers, and (3) lay the foundations for social stratification by
 continually reducing the zone of “optimum” productivity while allowing the
 population to expand at a geometric rate. It also (4) increased man’s potential
 for environmental destruction, so that eventually it would have been im¬
 possible for him to return to his former means of subsistence, had he wanted
 to.
     In this respect, early Near Eastern agriculture represents yet another
 example of the “second cyberneti cs”111. Starting with a relatively stable con¬
 figuration of plant and animal species at 10,000 B.C., early cultivation took
 two genera of cereal grasses and two genera of small ungulates out of their
 habitat and artificially increased their numbers while they underwent a
 series of genetic changes, many of which were favourable from man’s stand¬
 point. These favourable changes made feasible a still greater investment of
 human labour in the cereals and caprines, and a greater artificial expansion of
 their range at the expense of other species. At th is point, the ecosystem was no
 longer cybemating, or “stable”; all former rules which had kept species in
 check were off. What had been a minor deviati on from equilibrium at 8000
 b.c. had been amplified into a major subsystem at 5000 b.c., by which time
 irrigation had been employed to produce single-species stands of cereals where
 none had even existed in the wild. When equilibrium was momentarily
 reached again, perhaps around the time of the Sumeri an state, a great many
 species—like the aurochs, the onager, and the red deer— had been driven com¬
 pletely on to marginal land. Today they are locally or u niversally extinct in the
 Near East. The new niches opened up by agriculture and irrigation were not
96   Part I Patterns of exploitation    FLANNERY


for them, but for the crop pests and weeds which accompanied the cereals into
foreign habitats and became, in some cases, part of the dominant biota. So
great was the change in the Near East that today we see its original con¬
figuration only in the pollen record and the Palaeolithic bone debris.




      Notes
       1 Lees, G. M. and Falcon, N. L. (1952). The geographical history of the
         Mesopotamian plains, Geog.J., 118, pp. 24-39.
       2 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). The prehistory of south-western
         Iran: a preliminary report, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33 (9), pp. 147-206.
       3 Adams, R. M. (1962). Agriculture and urban life in early south-western
         Iran, Science, 136, p. 114.
       4 Lees, S. H. (1967). Regional integration of pig husbandry in the New
         Guinea highlands, Paper presented at the Michigan Academy of Sciences,
         Annual Meeting J967.
       5 Flannery, K. V. (1968). The Olmex and the Valley of Oaxaca: a model
         for inter-regional interaction in Formative times, Conference on the Olmec,
         Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, D.C., 27th October 1967.
       6 Wynne-Edwards, C. V. (1962). Animal Dispersion in relation to Social
         Behaviour. Edinburgh.
       7 Birdsell, J. B. (1966). Some predictions for the Pleistocene based upon
         equilibrium systems among recent hunters, Statement for conference,
         “Man the Hunter”, University of Chicago, 6-9th April 1966.
       8 McCarthy, F. D. (1957). Habitat, economy, and equipment of the
         Australian Aborigines, Aus. J. of Sci., 19, pp. 88-97; Bose, S. (1964).
         Economy of the Onge of Little Andaman, Man in India, 44 (4), pp. 298-
         310, Calcutta; Lee, R. B. (1965). Subsistence ecology of !Kung Bushman.
         Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
       9 Lee, R. B. (In press). !Kung Bushmen subsistence: an input-output
         analysis. To appear in Vayda, A. P. (ed.) Human Ecology: an anthropo¬
         logical reader, American Museum of Natural History.
      10 Binford, L. R. (1968). Post-Pleistocene adaptations in Binford L. R. and
         Binford, S. R. (eds.) New Perspectives in Archaeology, Chicago.
      11 Binford, L. R. (1968). ibid.
      12 Butzer, K. W. (1964). Environment and Archeology: an introduction to
         Pleistocene geography. Chicago.
      13 Birdsell, J. B. (1957). Some population problems involving Pleistocene
         man. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 22. The
         Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, pp. 47-69.
      14 Howell, F. C. (1959). Upper Pleistocene stratigraphy and early man in the
         Levant, Proc. of the American Phil. Soc., 103, (1), pp. 1-65.
      15 Solecki, R. S. (1964). Shanidar Cave, a late Pleistocene site in northern
         Iraq, Rep. of the Vlth Inter. Congress on the Quaternary, 4, pp. 413-23.
      16 Rossignol, M. (1962). Analyse pollinique de sediments marins Quatern-
         aires en Israel, II—Sediments Pleistocenes, Pollen et Spores, 4 (1), pp.
          121-48; Rossignol, M. (1963). Analyse pollinique de sediments Quatern-
          aires dans la plaine de Haifa, Israel, Israel J. of Earth Sciences, 12, pp.
          207-14.
      17 van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E., Jr. (1963). Preliminary pollen studies at
          Lake Zeribar, Zagros Mountains, south-western Iran, Science, 140, pp.
          65-9; van Zeist, W. (1967). Late Quaternary vegetation hustory of
          western Iran, Rev. of Palaeobot. and Palynol., 2, pp. 301-11.
    Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication        97

18 Flannery, K. V. (1965). The ecology of early food production in Mesopo¬
   tamia, Science, 147, pp. 1247-56.
19 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
20 Binford, L. R. and Binford, S. R. (1966). A preliminary analysis of
   functional variability in the Mousterian of Levallois facies, Amer. Anthrop.,
   68 (2, part 2), pp. 238-95.
21 Ewing, J. F. (1949). The treasures of Ksar ’Akil, Thought, 24, Fordham
   University, p. 276.
22 Ewing, J. F. (1951). Comments on the report of Dr. H. E. Wright, Jr., on
   his study of Lebanese marine terraces, J. of Near Eastern Studies, 10, p. 120.
23 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
24 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.; Garrod, D. A. E. (1930). The
   Palaeolithic of southern Kurdistan: excavations in the caves of Zarzi and
   Hazar Merd., Bull, of the American School of Prehistoric Research, 6, pp.
   9 43
    -   -

25 Solecki, R. S. (1964). op. cit. p. 417; Solecki, R. L. (1964). Zawi Chemi
   Shanidar, a post-Pleistocene village site in northern Iraq, Rep. of the Vlth
   Inter. Congress on the Quaternary, 4, pp. 405-12.
26 Solecki, R. S. (1964). ibid.; Solecki, R. L. (1964). ibid.
27 Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960). Prehistoric investigations in Iraqi
   Kurdistan, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, Oriental Institute,
   Chicago, 31.
28 van Loon, M. (1966). Mureybat: an early village in inland Syria, Archae¬
   ology, 19, pp. 215-16.
29 Perrot, J. (1966). Le gisement Natufien de Mallaha (Eynan), Israel,
   VAnthropologie, 70 (5-6), pp. 437-84.
30 Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960), ibid.
31 Howell, F. C. (1959). op. cit. table 10.
32 Garrod, D. A. E. and Bate, D. M. A. (1937). The Stone Age of Mt. Carmel:
   excavations at the Wadi el-Mughara, I. Oxford.
33 Ewing, J. F. (1949). op. cit. p. 262.
34 Reed, C. A. and Braidwood, R. J. (i960). Towards the reconstruction of
   the environmental sequence in north-eastern Iraq, in Braidwood, R. J.
   and Howe, B. op. cit. p. 169.
35 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
36 Platt, B. S. (1962). Tables of representative values of foods commonly
   used in tropical countries. Medical Research Council, Special Report
   Series, 302, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
37 Hesse, R., Allee, W. C. and Schmidt, K. P. (1951). Ecological Animal
   Geography. New York.
38 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.
39 van Zeist, W. and Wright, H. E. (1963). ibid.
40 Rossignol, M. (1962). ibid.; Rossignol, M. (1963). ibid.
41 Odum, E. P. and Odum, H. T. (1959). Fundamentals of Ecology, 2nd ed.
   Philadelphia, p. 281.
42 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). Distribution of wild wheats and
   barley. Science, 153, pp. 1075-80.
43 Reed, C. A. (1959). Animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
   Science, 130, pp. 1629-39; Reed, C. A. (i960). A review of the archae¬
   ological evidence on animal domestication in the prehistoric Near East,
   in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. op. cit. pp. 119-46.
44 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). op. cit. p. 1078.
45 Harlan, J. R. (1967). A wild wheat harvest in Turkey, Archaeology, 20 (3),
   pp. 197-201.
46 Harlan, J. R. and Zohary, D. (1966). ibid.
47 Harlan, J. R. (1967). op. cit. p. 198.
48 Perrot, J. (1966). op. cit. pp. 480-3.
98   Part I Patterns of exploitation    Flannery


     49 van Loon, M. (1966). ibid.
     50 Kirkbride, D. (1966). Five seasons at the pre-pottery Neolithic village of
        Beidha in Jordan, Palestine Exploration Quarterly, 98 (1), pp. 8-72.
     51 Helbaek, H. (In press). Plant-collecting, dry-farming, and irrigation
        agriculture in prehistoric Deh Luran, in Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and
        Neely, J. A. Prehistory and human ecology of the Deh Luran plain,
        Memoirs, Univ. of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology.
     52 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
     53 Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.
     54 Flannery, K. V., Kirkby, A. V., Kirkby, M. J. and Williams, A. W., Jr.
        (1967). Farming systems and political growth in ancient Oaxaca, Science,
        158, pp. 445-54.
     55 Kirkbride, D. (1966). ibid.
     56 Masson, V. M. (1965). The Neolithic farmers of Central Asia, Acts, VI
        Inter. Congress of Pre- and Proto-historic Sciences, 2, pp. 205-15.
     57 Helbaek, H. (1966). Commentary on the phylogenesis of Triticum and
        Hordeum, Econ. Bot., 20, pp. 350-60; Helbaek, H. (1966). Pre-pottery
        Neolithic farming at Beidha, in Kirkbride, D. Five seasons at the pre¬
        pottery Neolithic village of Beidha in Jordan, Palestine Exploration
        Quarterly, 98 (1), pp. 61-6; Masson, V. M. (1965). ibid.
     58 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
     59 White, T. (1953). A method of calculating the dietary percentage of
        various food animals utilised by aboriginal peoples, American Antiquity,
        18 (4), pp. 396-8.
     60 Walker, E. P. (1964). Mammals of the World. Baltimore.
     61 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.; Obvious difficulties were encountered in finding
        values for some of the wild foods at Ali Kosh. For gazelle meat, I have used
        the values for lean goat meat; for onager, those for lean beef. Small legume
        values are those given for fenugreek (Trigonella sp.), etc.
     62 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
     63 Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.; Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A.
        (In press), ibid.
     64 Watson, P. J. (1966). Clues to Iranian prehistory in modern village life.
        Expedition, 8 (3), p. 13.
     65 May, J. M. (1961). The Ecology of Malnutrition in the Far and Near East.
        New York. p. 370.
     66 Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.
     67 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). op. cit. footnote 6.
     68 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit. p. no.
     69 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.
     70 Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.
     71 May, J. M. (1961). op. cit. p. 373; the synergistic value of food combina¬
        tions was brought home to me in 1963 while I worked closely in the field
        with my friend and colleague, Frank Hole, excavating the paleolithic
        caves of Iran’s Khorramabad Valley. As we sat in our camp in the evening
        —partaking of barley in its most appealing form—we used to share a
        large paper sack of Kurdistan pistachios (Pistacia atlantica). Wild products
        being what they are, the 1963 pistachio crop was riddled with small live
        caterpillars which had bored into the nuts and lay waiting for the unwary
        eater. I examined each pistachio carefully as I opened it, and as a con¬
        sequence had to discard about half; but I noticed that Hole was able to
        eat 100% of the ones he selected, and I commented on his luck. To
        which he replied: “I’m just not looking.” I later learned that a kilo of
        dried caterpillars may contain 3720 calories, 550 grams of protein, 2700
        milligrams of calcium, and a generous supply of thiamine, riboflavin, and
        iron (see Platt, B. S. (1962). ibid.). In fact, the protein content is double
        that of the pistachios themselves, and a combination of the two foods
     Origins and ecological effects of early Near Eastern domestication      99

    probably has a synergistic effect exceeding the value of the nuts alone.
    Hole’s wise decision to diversify his subsistence base brought him out of
    the field season a good thirty pounds heavier than me.
 72 Watson, P. J. (1966). ibid.
 73 Harding, T. G. (1967). Voyagers of the Vitiaz Strait: a study of a New
    Guinea trade system. Seattle; Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
 74 Lees, G. M. (1967). ibid.; Rappaport, R. A. (1967). Ritual regulation of
    environmental relations among a New Guinea people, Ethnology, 6 (1),
    pp. 17-30.
 75 Lees, S. H. (1967). ibid.
 76 Flannery, K. V. (In press), ibid.
 77 Adams, R. M. (1965). Land behind Baghdad: a history of settlement on the
    Diyala plains. Chicago, p. 14.
 78 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit. p. 115.
 79 Adams, R. M. (1965). op. cit. p. 5.
 80 Nicolaisen, J. (1963). Ecology and culture of the pastoral Tuareg, National-
    museets Skrifter, 9, Copenhagen.
 81 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. (In press), ibid.
 82 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
 83 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit. p. no.
 84 Hole, F., Flannery, K. V. and Neely, J. A. (In press), ibid.
 85 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit.
 86 Wright, H. T. (1967). The administration of rural production in an early
    Mesopotamian town. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Chicago, pp. 38-9.
 87 Adams, R. M. (1962). ibid.
 88 Helbaek, H. (i960). The paleoethnobotany of the Near East and Europe,
    in Braidwood, R. J. and Howe, B. (i960), op. cit. pp. 99-118; Helbaek,
    H. (i960). Ecological effects of irrigation in ancient Mesopotamia, Iraq,
    22, pp. 186-96; Helbaek, H. (In press), ibid.
 89 Adams, R. M. (1962). ibid.; Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
 90 Adams, R. M. (i960). Early civilizations: subsistence and environment,
    in Kraeling, C. H. and Adams, R. M. (eds.) City Invincible: a symposium
    on urbanization and cultural development in the ancient Near East. Chicago,
    pp. 269-95.
 91 Ryder, M. L. (1958). Follicle arrangement in skin from wild sheep,
    primitive domestic sheep and in parchment, Nature, Lond. 182, pp. 781-3.
 92 Pabot, H. (i960). The Native Vegetation and its Ecology in the Khuzistan
    River Basins. Khuzistan Development Service, Ahwaz, Iran.
 93 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). op. cit. fig. 8.
 94 Personal communication from S. Bokonyi and D. Perkins, Jr.
 95 Textiles from £atal Hiiyiik, once thought to be perhaps the earliest wool
    know, have been examined now by Ryder, M. L. (1965). Report of textiles
    from £atal Hiiyuk, Anatolian Studies, 15, pp. 175-6, and it appears that
    they are mostly flax fibre.
 96 Hilzheimer, M. (1941). Animal remains from Tell Asmar, Studies in
    Ancient Oriental Civilization, 20, Univ. of Chicago, Oriental Institute.
 97 Ryder, M. L. (1958), ibid.
 98 Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1964). Desert Animals: physiological problems of heat
    and water. Oxford.
 99 Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1964). op. cit. p. 99.
100 Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1964). op. cit. p. 97.
101 Reeder, J. R. (1967). Grasses, Encyclopedia Britannica, 1967 edition, 10,
    p. 700.
102 Pabot, H. (i960), ibid.
103 Hole, F. and Flannery, K. V. (1967). ibid.
104 Adams, R. M. (1962). op. cit.
105 May, J. M. (1961). op. cit.
ioo   Part I Patterns of exploitation     FLANNERY


      106 May, J. M. (1961). op. cit. p. 357; Cressey, G. B. (i960). Crossroads: land
          and life in South-west Asia. Chicago.
      107 May, J. M. (1961). ibid.
      108 Palerm, A. and Wolf, E. (1957). Ecological potential and cultural develop¬
          ment in Mesoamerica, in Studies in Human Ecology, Social Science
          Monographs, 3, Pan American Union, Washington, D.C. pp. 1-37.
      109 Palerm, A. and Wolf, E. (1957). op. cit. p. 36.
      no May, J. M. (1961). op. cit. p. 343.
      in Maruyama, M. (1963). The second cybernetics: deviation-amplifying
          mutual causal processes, American Scientist 51 (2), pp. 164-79; Flannery,
          K. V. (1968). Archaeological systems theory and early Mesoamerica, in
          Anthropological archaeology in the Americas, Anthropological Society of
          Washington.
      P. A. JEWELL

     Wild mammals and their potential for new
     domestication

It is a remarkable fact, to which allusion is made by many authors, that so few
species of the world’s rich mammalian fauna have been domesticated by man.
Most of these species, moreover, were domesticated anciently and when, in
the Neolithic, the four major meat producers, sheep, goats, cattle and pigs,
were under control, domestication for this purpose was practically at an end.
Innumerable alternative species of large herbivore were available for domesti¬
cation but an insignificant number were taken in hand: in Asia several
species of bovini were domesticated and many of them fulfil a role similar to
that of cattle; reindeer are outstanding in having been domesticated to meet
the exigencies of a particular environment; and horses, camels and llamas have
come to serve functions other than food supply. In many areas the inferiority
of the domestic stock in fitness and in productivity must have been obvious,
yet in his migrations man has always attempted to take his exotic beasts with
him. He has preferred to endure their low productivity rather than attempt
the revolution of mastering new species.
  Now, however, man has been brought to the point where he is obliged to
take a new look at his stock. The need arises from his own prodigious in¬
crease in numbers and his increasing demands for meat1. All the species that
could once be hunted are becoming less and less available: natural habitats
have been relentlessly destroyed and the majority of the world’s mammalian
species, certainly the large herbivores, are faced with extinction. Rather than
lose species by default man must review his total animal resources and
amongst other actions initiate a new phase of domestication in order to
exploit those resources to the full2. Success in this process would be a key
factor in meeting the impending catastrophe of a world shortage of food.
  Present meat-producing domestic animals are all members of the order
Artiodactyla and it is within this same order that the greatest potential for
new domestication lies. A broad examination of all mammals suggests five
orders within which species should be domesticated for various purposes:
primates for medical research; rodents for research, for certain types of small-
scale intensive meat production, and as furbearers; carnivores as furbearers;
102   Part I Patterns of exploitation   JEWELL


and the two ungulate orders, Perissodactyla and Artiodactyla for meat
production.
  Of the families in the Perissodactyla only the Equidae appear suitable for
domestication, and of these only zebra remain undomesticated. It is known
from past successes that zebra can be tamed and trained to pull waggons3. The
animals are not now needed for draught but as will be discussed below they
should be considered as possible meat producers.
  The order Artiodactyla comprises 194 species4; ninety-two of these species
are indigenous to Africa and special attention will be given to domestication
in that continent. It would be remiss, however, not to mention the potential
for domestication in the very large family that is excluded from Africa,
namely the deer. There are forty-one species of deer but only one species,
the reindeer, Rangifer tarandus, has been domesticated. The unique value of
this species lies in its exploitation of the tundra. But another deer, the elk,
Alces dices, could well be the best meat producer to exploit the taiga and other
northern, but not extreme arctic zones. Great progress has in fact already
been made in its domestication and in the Pechero-Ilych Park of northern
Russia a large herd of elk are under careful management and selection, and
show most of the attributes required of domestic animals5. Probably other
species of deer merit domestication and their special role would be that of
controlled browsers in the temperate forest zone.



      Potential in Africa

The greatest concentrations of wild large herbivores, and greatest assem¬
blages of species, are in Africa. But many of Africa’s human populations,
typifying developing countries, suffer from lack of animal protein in their
diets6. The African situation is also a challenging one because it is peculiar
that no indigenous species (apart from the ass in North Africa) have been
domesticated there. The major factors contributing to this situation would
seem to be as follows: (a) the relatively recent incursion of agricultural
peoples into southern Africa; (b) the abundant prey species available for
hunting and until recently providing an alternative meat supply; (c) the
presence of several powerful carnivores, the lion, leopard, hyaena and
hunting dog which have presented a severe obstacle to attempting new
domestications; (d) tradition and folk lore which distinguish between wild
beasts and those that “chose to follow man”, and social customs associated
with established domestic species that strongly encourage conservatism. The
prejudices engendered by these factors are not confined to black Africans.
White settlers and the instigators of veterinary policies have proved to be just
as inflexible and instead of treating meat production in Africa as a biological
problem, they have pursued programmes of prodigious game slaughter in an
effort to make the ranges safe for familiar, but unsuitable, domestic animals
                   Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication   103



      Limitations to the productivity of domestic stock
Cattle, sheep, goats and pigs have an evolutionary adaptation to the environ¬
ments in which they originated and a limited ability to adapt to new ones. The
protection afforded by careful husbandry and by veterinary medicine has
permitted an enormous extension of their range, but in some environments
their efficiency is reduced to marginal levels and diseases may offer absolute
barriers. The most outstanding example of limitation by disease is tsetse-
borne trypanosomiasis infection in Africa. The disease renders 4-15 million
square miles of land unavailable to cattle (representing about 37% of the
total land area of Africa)7, but indigenous wild mammals are well adapted to
the parasites. Tremendous effort is expended to try and increase the area in
which cattle can be safely moved and one of the major means of implementing
this policy has been “game elimination”, on the supposition that certain
species of wild mammals act as a reservoir for the disease. Millions of head of
antelopes, buffalo and other species have been slaughtered with variable and
only partial success. The cost in squandered protein resources is not usually
taken into account in assessing these schemes.
  A second limitation to livestock efficiency lies in the physiology and feeding
behaviour of the animals concerned. Much of Africa is arid and hot and animals
must cope with these exigencies8. Many breeds of domestic animals, particularly
cattle of zebu stock, respond reasonably well, but indigenous large mammals
are better equipped having evolved finely adjusted behavioural and physio¬
logical adaptations to these environmental extremes. Several species cope
with heat stress by tolerating considerable fluctuations in body temperature
and thus lessening the need to lose water: buffalo and oryx provide examples9.
The eland voids faeces of low moisture content and this enables it to gain
more preformed water. If eland and ox were eating the same succulent
acacia leaves, and were deprived of drinking water the eland would achieve
the better water balance. An estimated 4 litres of water per 100 kg. body weight
per day is available to the eland from food and metabolic sources so that the
animal can be almost independent of surface water10. The ruminants have
evolved an effective means of nitrogen conservation by urea-recycling through
the salivary glands11, and the species adapted to arid environments can be
expected to be particularly efficient in this regard. Amongst domestic stock in
the tropics, fertility is often low but wild mammals exhibit a remarkably high
reproductive capacity as has been shown in studies on wildebeest, eland and
hartebeest12.
  Finally, in their selectivity towards the plants that they graze or browse,
indigenous mammals probably exhibit superiority over exotic species, and
the antelopes can select a high proportion of the most nutritious parts of
plants. The more important aspect of food-plant use, however, is that
exhibited by a community of indigenous herbivores which can exploit the
5—DOI’AA   *   *
104   Part I Patterns of exploitation   JEWELL


habitat far more efficiently than husbanded groups of cattle, sheep and goats.
Lamprey13 has documented the manner in which a community of herbivores
are separated ecologically and use different parts of a complex environment.
The major species in his study of E. African savannah woodland were harte-
beest, waterbuck, wildebeest, buffalo, zebra, impala, Grant’s gazelle, warthog,
eland, lesser kudu, rhino, dikdik, elephant and giraffe. Of these the first three
are grass feeders; buffalo, eland and kudu take a fair proportion of herbs and
shrubs; warthog tackle sedges; and elephant and giraffe concentrate on
shrubs and trees. This spatial separation is augmented by a separation in the
time and season at which species use different areas, giving rise to a grazing
succession14. These communities can reach a very high biomass and the
carrying capacity of most savannah areas is considerably greater for a complex
of indigenous herbivores than for ranched domestic species15.



      Game cropping

In Africa, biologists have been greatly concerned with the kinds of facts
presented above. If communities of indigenous wild mammals have a much
higher potential productivity than domestic stock then means of harvesting
their yield must be devised. Game cropping16 is the method employed and
many successful schemes are in progress in Uganda, Kenya, Rhodesia and
Zambia. The technical problems of cropping are, however, very great: hunt¬
ing and killing without excessive disturbance is difficult; it is difficult to
maintain quality in handling and processing meat in the field; transport and
haulage are very costly. Nevertheless, from a biological point of view, the
system has one great advantage which is that the several herbivores involved
are free to move and select food plants, water and shelter, in accord with the
way these are best provided by the habitat. The system can make a very big
contribution to meat production and as an “extensive” system of game
ranching is likely to find a permanent place in the economy. Its role however
is different from what would be achieved by newly domesticated species, and
these methods of exploitation must be seen as complementary.



      Domesticating new species in Africa

One species of African large herbivore is now domesticated. This is the
eland Taurotragus oryx. It has long been bred and studied in the Ukraine17
and many small herds are kept in southern Africa18. It shows high fertility,
good live weight gains, and excellent carcass qualities19, and even in those
attributes usually thought of as resulting from domestication such as docility,
ease of handling, and restraint by fences, the eland is superior to range cattle.
Eland thrive under conditions of food, water and tsetse fly infestation in
                  Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication     105

which cattle cannot survive; they can be milked, moreover, and their milk has
peculiar and superior keeping properties of great value in a tropical environ¬
ment20.
  An even greater prize for domestication may exist in the giant eland, T.
derbianus, a form indigenous to W. Africa, and formerly extending in range as
far as the Sudan21. The survival of this species is endangered, however, and in
a visit from Nigeria to the Cameroons in 1966 I was not able to assure myself
that any still survive.
  The blesbok, Damaliscus dorcas, has not reached the same stage of sub¬
jugation as the eland, but, on the other hand, the species exists entirely as
dispersed herds on S. African range-land, where they belong to the land-
owners, and none survive in the wild state. They are small hartebeests, that
can exploit sour veld more effectively than cattle22, that breed and thrive well
in dry conditions and are easily restrained by fences. They can be managed by
being rounded up and impounded in corrals.
  The hartebeests in general form an extremely promising group of species
that should be domesticated. Their radiation in Africa has produced diver¬
gent types that are likely to show particularly valuable adaptations to local
environments. Hybrids occur where geographical races overlap and the two
genera, Damaliscus and Alcelaphus, can be regarded as forming dines through
the continent. Hybrids have been reported between the genera23.
  The domestication of the African buffalo, Synceros cajfer, is long overdue. It
fills a niche that is very similar to the domestic ox, but has all the advantages
of being indigenous. Having a very wide distribution throughout Africa the
species must, in its many local forms, have immunity to a wide range of
trypansomiases and other infections. Tame buffalo have often been reared24
and the fierceness of the wild animals should not be a deterrent to mastering
them. The progenitors of cattle, Bos primigenius, were quite as ferocious, and
other species of bovini, such as the gaur, B. gaurus, have been domesticated
despite their formidable disposition. Buffalo are larger than range cattle,
make good live weight gains, give high carcass yields25 and naturally herd
closely.
  The warthog, Phacochoerus aethiopicus, should be mentioned because it is
unaffected by African swine fever which makes pig-farming difficult. Wart-
hogs are easy to tame and in grubbing for roots and tubers they exploit a
food-source not touched by other species. Experimental rearing and handling
will be required in order to decide which species of African swine, whether
warthog, bush-pig, Potamochoerus porcus, or giant forest hog, Hylochoerus
memertzhagen, is best suited to domestication.
  The wildebeest, Connochaetesgnou, zebra, Equus burchelli, and small gazelles
are the dominant grazers of the great open savannah areas of E. Africa,
and whilst the small animals complement the large, the wildebeest and zebra
would appear to compete for available grazing. In such a situation it would be
essential to study both wildebeest and zebra, and examine the efficiency of
io6   Part I Patterns of exploitation   JEWELL


their ecological adaptations in order to decide which might be the best
domestic producer. Other factors, such as the acceptability of the meat for
human consumption, of course enter such decisions. It might be found that
domestic eland could replace these species in many situations, but to achieve
overall maximum productivity the principle of ecological separation must be
respected. For this same reason, although it might appear extravagant of
effort, it will probably prove economically rewarding to domesticate the small
gazelles.
  Examples will not be multiplied, but it is obvious that many other species
must be considered as candidates for domestication. Selection will depend on
the geographical area, and ecosystem, of intended use, and on the success
achieved with pioneer species.



      General considerations

It may be supposed that the process (in prehistoric times) by which our
present stock were domesticated was a protracted one in which much in¬
genuity, and a great expenditure of human effort was involved. If new
domestication is to be effective it must be done quickly, on a large enough
scale to demonstrate its economic feasibility and every device of animal
control and breeding will need to be used. The foundation stock of tamed
animals should be large so that individuals can be rigorously screened for
suitable breeding stock. Desirable behavioural traits must first be sought
(docility, acceptance of restraint, low aggressiveness, etc.) and intensive
behavioural studies of the species concerned should be initiated early.
Techniques of artificial insemination should be worked out immediately for
each species, just as they are currently being worked out for the asiatic
buffalo, Bubalus bubalus. Males with desirable characters can then sire in¬
creased progeny. Immobilizing and tranquillizing drugs could be used in
many ways to aid handling.
  Certain types of social behaviour in wild ungulates may be incompatible
with ordinary methods of husbandry. It is notable that existing domestic
herbivores are gregarious species that exhibit dominance hierarchies within
their social groups, and this organization is well seen in feral cattle26, feral
sheep27 and wild gaur28. Many species of African buck, however, exhibit
territorial behaviour29 in which the males take possession of certain areas of
land and exclude other males. It has been suggested30 that this behaviour
would be unfavourable in domestic stock, but whilst superficially this might
appear likely it seems to me that a better understanding of the whole social
organization of territorial species would indicate ways of overcoming the
difficulties, and even of turning them to advantage. The dominant males in a
herd of some newly domesticated species, if firmly attached to small terri¬
tories, could offer focal points of attraction keeping the herd together. The
                 Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication     107

effect that territoriality has in dispersing animals through both favourable and
less favourable terrain can promote more intensive use of the habitat31.
Secondary males, not required for breeding, could be castrated and this would
presumably reduce conflict.
  Hybridization could prove a valuable means of manipulating domestic
forms. The hartebeests form dines of two genera, and hybrids between local
geographical races occur naturally32. There appear to be no certain records of
African buffalo crossing with cattle, but they might interbreed with other
bovines. These hybrids, even if sterile, could be expected to exhibit many
useful characters, and their production might provide a means of circumvent¬
ing some of the problems of domesticating buffalo.
  Present-day domesticated forms of cattle, sheep and goats, differ markedly
from their wild progenitors and one of the most significant changes that has
been exhibited is a diminution in size33. Such a change may have accompanied
selection for docility as well as have been induced by poor feeding conditions
in captivity. Any newly domesticated species can be expected to change or be
deliberately changed, in the directions of, for example, improved bodily
proportions for meat production and reduced horn size.
  If the developments discussed above do take place they will yield informa¬
tion of a very valuable kind for archaeologists. The opportunity will exist to
study directly the effects of domestication and selection on a variety of large
mammals, particularly incidental changes in the skeleton. It should also be
noted that current ecological studies of large mammals, and investigations
that would be stimulated by new economic uses, could have much relevance
to an understanding of the ecology of prehistoric man. The work of Laws and
Parker34 on the elephant, for example, has led them to suggest that this
species has been a major agent, together with climate, man and fire, in modi¬
fying the environment of prehistoric Africa.
  The likelihood of physical and behavioural changes serves to emphasize that
domestication cannot be regarded as a form of conservation for species
threatened with extinction. Morris35 comments, referring to domesticated
animals: “Their numbers are dramatically increased. In terms of world
populations they are tremendously successful. But it is a qualified success.
The price they have paid is their evolutionary freedom. They have lost their
genetic independence and ... are now subject to our breeding whims
and fancies.” Domestication is a way of greatly increasing the exploitation of
species that have long been our prey. At the same time it could accelerate the
extermination of the wild form over the range where the domesticated form is
used, and for the same reasons of competition and interference with domestic
stock as happened in the past36. It will then become of even greater import¬
ance to keep truly wild populations in existence in National Parks, and
protected by appropriate hunting laws, so that they can remain available for
study in relatively natural environments, and can provide invaluable reserves
of genetic material.
io8   Part I Patterns of exploitation    JEWELL



      Notes
       1 FAO reports, and information summarized by Crawford, M. A. (i9($).
         The possible use of wild animals as future sources of food in Africa, Vet.
         Rec., 82, p. 305.
       2 Jewell, P. A. (1968). Climate versus man and his animals, Nature, Lond.
         218, pp. 993-4-
       3 Bigalke, R. C. (1965). Can Africa produce new domestic animals ?, New
         Scientist, 374.
       4 Morris, D. (1965). The Mammals. London.
       5 Yazan, Y. and Knorre, Y. (1964). Domesticating elk in a Russian National
         Park, Oryx, 7, pp. 301-4.
       6 Latham, M. (1965). Human Nutrition in Tropical Africa. FAO, Rome; and
         see references in Crawford, M. A. (1968). op. cit.
       7 Phillips, J. (1959). Agriculture and Ecology in Africa. London, pp. 63-72;
         Deshler, W. (1963). Cattle in Africa: distribution, types, and problems,
         Geog. Rev., 53, pp. 52-8.
       8 McDowell, R. E. (1968). Climate versus man and his animals. Nature,
         Lond. 218, p. 641.
       9 Bligh, J. and Harthoorn, A. M. (1965). Continuous radiotelemetric
         records of the deep body temperature of some unrestrained African
         mammals under near natural conditions, J. Physiol., 176, pp. 145-62.
      10 Taylor, C. R. and Lyman, C. P. (1967). A comparative study of the
         environmental physiology of an East African antelope, the eland, and the
          Hereford steer. Physiol. Zool., 40, pp. 280-95.
      11 Livingstone, H. G., Payne, W. J. A. and Friend, M. T. (1962). Urea
          excretion in ruminants, Nature, Lond. 194, pp. 1057-8.
      12 Symposium on Biology of Reproduction in Mammals, Nairobi, 1968.
          Symp. Soc. Reprod. Fert. (In press).
      13 Lamprey, H. E. (1963). Ecological separation of the large mammal
          species in the Tarangire Game Reserve, Tanganyika, East Afr. Wildlf.J.,
          1, pp. 63-92.
      14 Vesey-Fitzgerald, D. F. (i960). Grazing succession among East African
          game animals, J. Mammal., 41, pp. 161-72.
      15 Talbot, L. M., Payne, W. J. A., Ledger, H. P., Verdcourt, L. D. and
          Talbot, M. H. (1965). The meat production potential of wild animals in
          Africa, Commonwealth Bureau An. Breed. Gen. Tech. Comm., 16, p. 42.
      16 Talbot, L. M., Payne, W. J. A., Ledger, H. P., Verdcourt, L. D. and
          Talbot, M. H. (1965). ibid.
      17 Uspenskii, G. A. and Saglanskii, A. D. (1952). Domestication of the eland
          in the U.S.S.R. Summary in Rhod.J. Agric. Res., 1, p. 87.
      18 See Bigalke, R. C. (1964). ibid.
      19 Zyl, J. H. M. van. (1962). The meat production of South African game
          animals. 1. The eland. Fauna and Flora, 13, pp. 35-40; Skinner, J. D.
          (1967). An appraisal of the eland as a farm animal in Africa, Anim. Breed.
          Abst., 35, pp. 177-86.
      20 Treus, V. and Kravchenko, D. (1968). Methods of rearing and economic
          utilization of eland in the Askaniya—Nova Zoological Park, Symp. Zool.
          Soc. London, 21, pp. 395-411.
      21 Sidney, J. (1965). The past and present distribution of some African
          ungulates, Trans. Zool. Soc., London, 30, pp. 1-396.
      22 Kettlitz, W. K. (1967). The Blesbok, Fauna and Flora, 18, pp. 36-46.
      23 D. dorcas X A. buselaphus; Kettlitz, W. K. (1967). ibid.
      24 Bigalke, R. C. and Neitz, W. O. (1954). Indigenous ungulates as a possible
          source of new domesticated animals, J. S. Afr. Vet. Med. Ass., 25, pp.
         45-54-
             Wild mammals and their potential for new domestication          109

25 Zyl, J. H. M. van and Skead, D. M. (1964). Meat production of South
   African game animals. 2. The African buffalo. Fauna and Flora, 15, pp.
   34-40.
26 Schloeth, R. (1958). Cycle annuel et comportement Social du taureau de
   Camargue, Mammalia, 22, pp. 121-39.
27 Grubb, P. and Jewell, P. A. (1966). Social grouping and home range in
   feral Soay sheep, Symp. Zool. Soc., Lond. 18, pp. 179-210.
28 Schaller, G. (1967). The Deer and the Tiger. Chicago.
29 Uganda Kob, see Buechner, H. K. (1963). Territoriality as a behavioural
   adaptation to environment in Uganda Kob, Proc. XVI Int. Congr. Zool.,
   3, pp. 59-63; Waterbuck, see Kiley-Worthington, M. (1965). The water-
   buck in East Africa, Mammalia, 29, pp. 177-204.
30 Hale, E. B. (1962). Domestication and the evolution of behaviour, in
   Hafez, E. S. E. (ed.) The Behaviour of Domestic Animals. London.
31 Jewell, P. A. (1966). The concept of home range in mammals, Symp
   Zool. Soc., Lond. 18, pp. 85-109.
32 Sidney, J. (1965). ibid.
33 Jewell, P. A. (1962). Changes in size and type of cattle from prehistoric to
   medieval times in Britain, Z. Tierziicht Ziicht Biol., 77, pp. 159-67; Jewell,
   P. A. (1963). Cattle from British archaeological sites, Man and Cattle, Occ.
   paper Roy. Anthrop. Inst., 18, pp. 80-91.
34 Laws, R. M. and Parker, I. S. C. (1968). Recent studies on elephant
   population in East Africa, Symp. Zool. Soc., Lond. 21, pp. 219-359.
35 Morris, D. (1967). The Naked Ape. London.
36 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.
     I. G. SIMMONS

     Evidence for vegetation changes associated with
     mesolithic man in Britain

      Introduction
In Britain the case for neolithic and later forest clearance is unequivocably
established but is has been customary to regard mesolithic man as a hunter,
fisher, and collector, who did not affect his environment beyond his im¬
mediate   surroundings. Godwin1 says, “He was           one component of the
ecosystem, dependent upon the forest, rivers and lakes for food, surrounded
and dominated by the forest”. The example of Star Carr2 is quoted: here the
pollen record was affected very little by the felling of birch trees to make a
platform and only a few ruderal pollen were present. But Star Carr is but one
type of habitat used by mesolithic man, representing a lowland “wet” site,
i.e. in close contact with a lake and in a generally damp area. Other environ¬
ments include lowland “dry” sites, such as Addington, Kent3, Selboume4, and
Iping Common5, many of them being heathland today. In addition there are
numerous instances of mesolithic finds, often in large quantities, on the
moorlands. Bodmin Moor, Dartmoor, the Pennines, and the North York
Moors are examples6. The discovery of a lack of environmental modification
as typified by Star Carr, does not mean that a similar culture may not have
had a definite effect in a different habitat and it is proposed here to concentrate
on some investigations in the uplands. Here, the general pattern of finds is the
discovery of large numbers of microliths on the soil surface or stratified at a
peat-soil interface.



      Pollen-analytical evidence
I Dartmoor.     Investigations by the author7 of a streamside exposure at
1500 ft. (457 m.) not far from the source of the Blacklane Brook revealed a
phase during late zone VI which was interpreted as representing forest
recession. The deposit was amorphous blanket peat above a wood layer and
the evidence for an opening in the forest consisted of a sudden peak in
112   Part I Patterns of exploitation     SIMMONS


Pteridium which was coincident with an occurrence of Artemisia and a large
peak in Gramineae, followed by curves for several helophytes and for Prunus-
Sorbus type (probably S. aucuparia); though generally declining, the Corylus
curve also shows a peak at the point. After the initial explosion, the values
recede slightly but do not revert to their former absence. In this particular
context of time and locality the hypothesis of a clearance due to fire (Calluna
disappears) during the mesolithic cultural period was suggested. Its strati¬
graphic position suggests that it occurred in conjunction with the changeover
from forest to blanket mire; and the general unlikeliness of lightning fire
being a causative agent here allows the possibility that mesolithic man was in
some way concerned, but it is not implied that the use of fire was deliberate.
A parallel occurrence, characterized especially by a high (10% of AP) peak
of Rumex, along with Artemisia and Compositae pollen, is seen at site PA.2.
This is near Postbridge (1200 ft.), where mesolithic implements have been
found.
  2 Stump Cross, near Grassington, Yorks.        This site8 is important because
mesolithic flint flakes are stratified into muds. At the level of a flake charcoal is
found, and an Artemisia grain (cf. Blacklane on Dartmoor, supra, but there is
no Pteridium response); the Corylus curve rises sharply and there is a kink in
Ulmus. The time context is early zone Vila. Walker is inclined to see these
changes in pollen frequency as resulting from blanket mire inception due to
climatic change but they would equally well bear the interpretation of the
opening of a forest.
  3 The North York Moors.         Recent and hitherto unpublished work has
been carried out by the author on Egton High Moor, part of the central
watershed of this upland (Figs. 1, 2, 3). The most important site is at North
Gill, 1215 ft. (370 m.) where the base of the blanket peat shows a Poly trichum
peat (2-5 cm. thick) which is in some places overlain by a peat deposit con¬
sisting largely of charcoal (this is also up to 5 cm. thick). An amorphous
blanket peat then covers all. Detailed pollen analyses through the sequences

          mineral soil-^Polytrichum peat—^amorphous peat, and
         mineral soil->charcoal peat—> amorphous peat,

reveal similar patterns. In the amorphous peat at the horizon of the charcoal,
there are peaks in Pinus (30% of AP, hitherto at 5%) with a fall-off' in Quercus
and Alnus; Betula, Fraxinus and Corylus are high, as is Salix, and grains of
Artemisia, and Rumex, and spores of Pteridium are found. Afterwards, the
Pinus declines and Quercus regains its values, along with very high Alnus
frequencies. The Artemisia and Pteridium values remain low but do not
disappear. Analyses through the charcoal peat itself are equally revealing:
the same peaks of Pinus are found, along with high Betula, Corylus, but low
Quercus. The more detailed (2 cm. interval) analysis shows that Sphagnum
more or less disappears at the horizon of the ruderal pollen types (Plantago
lanceolata, Senecio type, Rumex and Chenopodiaceae). Forest regeneration is
                        Evidence for British mesolithic vegetation changes   113

shown by higher values of Quercus, Corylus, and Aims, diminution of the
ruderals and the come-back of Sphagnum.
  All this is consistent with an opening of the forest, which was probably
temporary, although there are hints, as on Dartmoor, that some land may
have remained open. The time context is early to mid Vila and so the
association of this phase with mesolithic man is hard to resist, especially since
this is an area of so many artefacts. Dimbleby9 came to similar conclusions in
the same region when as a consequence of soil pollen analyses he suggested
that fire resulted in an increase of Betula and Corylus (this is confirmed by the
present analyses, although they suggest these were not permanent effects),
increase of grass and Calluna beneath a lighter canopy (borne out for
Gramineae, but not on the whole for Calluna), and decrease of alder (again, a
temporary flourishing is suggested rather than a permanently increased
presence). Dimbleby’s suggestion of a lighter canopy is possibly corroborated
by the presence of Melampyrum, which Iversen10 has interpreted as indicat¬
ing the formation of partial clearings in formerly virgin forests.



      Evidence from analogous situations

This method of reasoning has many pitfalls, not least the use of present-day
cultural practices as analogies for the past, but in the case of the accounts of
early European travellers in the deciduous and mixed forests of the Eastern
seaboard of North America we may perhaps be more certain of its usefulness,
where although agriculture was practised, hunting and fishing was still an
important part of the economy. The effects of the Indians on their environ¬
ment as a result of these pursuits was often clearly recorded.
   Even the palaeolithic populations of the late-glacial period, Lawrence
et al.n suggested, may have prolonged the successional stages. But the
evidence for vegetation change in the eastern woodlands is much stronger12.
   The nomadism of some of the tribes did not, it appears, prevent them from
affecting the ecology: “temporary dwellings of a nomadic family band might
be occupied by a small partially cleared area, while semi-permanent villages
occupied clearings of considerable magnitude ... as much as 100 or 150
acres”13.
   It seems likely that populations here were larger than was likely in meso¬
lithic England although the reports of an annual cycle of migration (seashore
in summer, deep woods hunting camps in autumn and winter and rivers in
spring) do not conflict with our conception of the life a pre-agricultural
hunting, fishing, and gathering group.
   The use of fire by the Indians was apparently deliberate: in the Hudson
River and Lake Champlain regions the woods were burned in the autumn
and again in the spring in order to make hunting easier, to improve the
growth of grass and to surround game. Inland from Narragansett Bay, a
     114   Part 1 Patterns of exploitation                             simmons

                         D
                        -I"

                                                                                                                           z—      a




cm                       1111 L..L-L                                        i   i       i               j_1   illi                               L
                         0  30 0                           50      0                          50         80 0         30    10         10        0    !

                             Pinus             Betula                      Quercus                              Ulmus      Tilio   Proxinus Ainas

     NG 'a'                          POLLEN                     SUM                          COMPONENTS




     Fig i The basal part of the North Gill “a” profile, through the Poly trichum
           peat (horizontal lines) into the amorphous peat (dots). Note the two
           peaks of Pinus which are found again in North Gill “b”. This is the tree




               J         L                                                                          L          J  L
               50        0            50          100            150                               50         100 0                              60

       Calfuno               Gramineae                                                      Cyperaceae                 R lanceolata


       NG a
     Fig 2 North Gill “a” profile, non-tree pollen; symbols as in Fig i. Note the




                                                                                                                -1— 1 -)
              0        300     25 0              50 70 0        25 10 5             0              50           100 120    0                50
               Pinus     Betula      Quercus            Ulmus      Tilia            Alnus                                  Coryloid

                                                                           Fraxinus

     NG'b'
               [    POLLEN            SUM      COMPONENTS              1

     Fig 3 North Gill “b” profile, through the charcoal peat (black triangles) into
             the amorphous peat (black dots; with charred twig marked “V”). Note
             the two 30% Pinus peaks, and the correspondence of the Quercus fall-
                                                           Evidence for British mesolithic vegetation changes                                                                                           115



                                                                                                                                                            ■                                                    ; Vila

                                                                                                                   • Lonicera              - --                                                                   I


                                                                                                                   • Lonicera              —- -—                                                                 -

                                                                                                                   • Hedera                -                                                                      1
!                                                   j_1_i                        1 '            1         Li                               L   I        I        I       I    I l          I    I       I         I
00      150     200 0                      50       100     150     200          0         20             5                                0                                 50                                  100

                                                                                                                                               Trees                                           " Weeds"

                                                                                           V-




                           pollen diagram; an open square = 1% frequency, a large dot = present
                           but less than 1%. The Ulmus decline can be clearly seen.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vila
                                      o
                                      ★
                                                                                                                                                                                                    □
                                      □         —                                                                                                                                                   □


                           o
                           n
                           □
                                      o



    I_II_IU                            U L
     10 10 5                           5 0                          50 0                                                50                                           100               120 0                                  25

                                     ^               Filicales                       Sphagnum                                                                                                       Pteridium
                                  iZ, o.

                                  q o Or-
                                 •   %
                           early presence of Rumex and Urtica.
                                                                                                               I   to
            0                     o                          □                                                     □                                □ 0
            □                     □                          □               0                                     □                                □ □
                                  □         CO                           0   CO        '                                    1 I                     □ CO                     □
                                  □                          c          □ DO                                                I                       □ □                      0
      197                         □                          [=□             a                                              D •                     □ □ 375 □
                                                                                                                            0 *                                                                              --BU
                                  □                          CO          B   □

      JJ 1 1    1    1 i    U j                           _U 1111 U L_!                         U U                         u u                     1     11 1           1 11 1        1   l    11 1 1                1   1     1 1
      150 0         25:     5 I       10                   50 0 25 5 10                             5 5                     5     5                     10 0              30 0                 45 0                           , 100
                                                                                                                                                   -0 -o ■«                                                 A'
                                                                                                    u QAC ^
                                                                                                                                               d^
                                                                                                                                                                                 <S>
            Sail*     -5- C ^         0
                                                                                                     %    -» a-                       <3                    y,       0
                                                                                                                                                                                  \                         \    J*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               J'-;
                                                                   cl                % % o *0                       C. <c
                                                                                       %9 *>»                           '                                                          \
                                                                                                                                %                       \




                           off with the rise in the “weeds”, especially Rumex, Melampyrum.
                           Black dots indicate frequencies of less than 1%, stars pollen found in
                           scanning but not included in the count.
n6    Part I Patterns of exploitation   SIMMONS


traveller in 1524 noted open plains 25-30 leagues in extent and some town
histories in Connecticut mention the allocation of meadow land to incoming
settlers, the implication being that these were open spaces created by the
Indians. Similar meadows existed in Yosemite valley where the Indians
burned in order to favour the oaks which were their staple source of starch;
when the land was emparked succession to closed coniferous forest took
place14.
  Many other instances of Indian effects upon forest ecology can be
chronicled and their effects on land which is open already or at a forest-
grassland ecotone are well known15. It appears that fire was deliberately used
in the forests of the New World to make conditions easier for hunting, to
assist directly in hunting and to improve the forage for potential game
species.



      Towards a mechanism

Using both the evidence afforded by analogous cultures and the fragmentary
hints from the pollen analyses it is possible to suggest an ecological mechanism
whereby mesolithic man effected forest clearance. This is preliminary only
and doubtless improvements to the sequence outlined will be suggested in due
course.
  We may suppose that there were on the higher parts of our uplands areas
particularly favourable to game, perhaps seasonally. The forest might be
broken or slightly thinner because of environmental factors or, more likely
these sites were known to mesolithic man, who would set up hunting
camps in the vicinity. Grieg and Rankine16 found that on the flanks of Dart¬
moor the greatest concentrations of mesolithic implements were at spring
heads and at the North Gill sites referred to above single grains of Potamogeton
and Typha latifolia were found. In order to improve the terrain for hunting,
fire was used to clear underbrush and to corral game. Thus open spaces were
created and doubtless the camps themselves created the open habitats in
which ruderals might flourish. The clearing in North Yorkshire however
seems to be of the major forest trees, with regeneration of light-demanding
pioneer species so that either some way of immediately clearing the larger
trees was used (ring barking is an obvious possibility) or a long-term process
was at work. The repeated use of fire would kill regenerating trees and the
subsequently increased numbers of game would graze out the others so that
in time no regeneration of the forest components would take place. There
might come a time when the system broke down because the game avoided the
area or because the local populations had been too vigorously culled. Then the
clearing created would colonize back to forest, via Corylus, Betula and
Fraxinus stages. In some circumstances it is not inconceivable that soil
deterioration had set in, preventing the regrowth of the high forest to its
                                                                 -                              Regeneration by                                                -
                                                                  clearing              light-deman ding trees clearing
                                                                  REFORESTED            - DESERTED
                                                                  BUT NOT TOTALLY       ? PodzoliS8tion        BY MAN
                                                                                                     </>
                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                     a>
                                                                                                     >•     4->        s    r_
                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                Q.   cd                     o




                                                                                            X                                        O
                                                                                                       Q-   o     -o   N
                                                                                                                       o        CO   4->   C




                                                                                                                                                               £'5 o
                                                                                                                                                                    c-        a> —
                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                               <2 m
                                                                                                                                                                  > o2-S §»
                                                                                                                                                                              ° Jc
                                                                                                                                               UOJ^BSjlOZpOd




                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                               «<
                                                                                                                                                               U4              (S
                                                                                                                                                               o              Z
                                                                                                 </>
                                                                                                at
                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                        CD
                                                                                                       CD              TO   c
                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                        <=n


fig 4 A possible mechanism for the sequence of clearing by Mesolithic man in upland areas
Ii8   Part I Patterns of exploitation    SIMMONS


former condition. This would account for the continued open space indica¬
tors at Blacklane (Dartmoor) and North Gill (North York Moors). This is
shown schematically above as Fig. 4.



      Conclusion

Although more evidence is needed, this discussion points to the possibility
of clearance by mesolithic man in what was to become a marginal environ¬
ment. Irreversible effects were probably limited to these areas and that is why
Star Carr does not fall into such a category. The evidence so far assembled
points to the fact that only in upland areas or areas where the soil was changed
easily by rapid pedogenic processes such as podzolization after clearance (on
high ground this may have meant that he was an important agent in the
inception of blanket bog), did mesolithic man exert a strong or lasting effect
on his environment. But at a rough estimate, such areas may have comprised
about five-eighths of England and Wales17.



      Notes
       1 Godwin, H. (1965). The beginnings of agriculture in Western Europe in
         Hutchinson, J. (ed.) Essays on Crop Plant Evolution. Cambridge.
       2 Clark, J. G. D. (1954). Excavations at Star Carr. Cambridge.
       3 Dimbleby, G. W. (1963). Pollen analysis of a site at Addington, Kent.
         Grana Palynol., 4, 140-8.
       4 Rankine, W. F. and Dimbleby, G. W. (i960). Further excavations at a
         Mesolithic site at Oakhanger, Selborne, Hants., Proc. Prehist. Soc., 26,
         pp. 246-62.
       5 Keef, P. A. M., Wymer, J. J. and Dimbleby, G. W. (1965). A Mesolithic
         site on Iping Common, Sussex, England, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 31, pp. 85-92.
       6 Fox, A. (1964). South-West England-, Elgee, F. and H. W. (1933). The
         Archaeology of Yorkshire; Wainwright, G. J. (i960). Three microlithic
         industries from South-west England and their affinities, Proc. Prehist.
         Soc., 26, pp. 193-201.
       7 Simmons, I. G. (1964). Pollen diagrams from Dartmoor, New Phytol.,
         63, pp. 165-80; Simmons, I. G. (In press). Early man and environment on
         Dartmoor, Proc. Prehist. Soc.
       8 Walker, D. (1956). A site at Stump Cross, near Grassington, Yorkshire,
         and the age of the Pennine microlithic industry, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 22,
         pp. 23-8.
       9 Dimbleby, G. W. (1961). The ancient forest of Blackamore, Antiquity, 35,
         pp. 123-8.
      10 Iversen, J. (1964). Retrogressive vegetational succession in the Post¬
         glacial, J. Ecol., 52 (Suppl.), pp. 59-70; and Personal communication.
      11 Lawrence, D. B., Schoeniker, R. E., Quispel, A. and Bond, G. (1967).
         The role of Dryas drummondii in vegetation development following ice
         recession at Glacier Bay, Alaska, with special reference to its nitrogen
         fixation by root nodules, J. Ecol., 55, pp. 793-813.
      12 Day, G. M. (1953). The Indian as a factor in the North-eastern forest,
         Ecology, 34, pp. 329-346; Niering, W. A. and Goodwin, R. H. (1962).
                   Evidence for British mesolithic vegetation changes       119


    Ecological studies in the Connecticut Aboretum Natural Area. I. Intro¬
    duction and Survey of vegetation types. Ecology, 43, pp. 41-54.
13 Day, G. M. (1953). op. cit. p. 330.
14. Gibbens, R. P. and Heady, H. F. (1964). The Influence of Modern Man
    on the vegetation of the Yosemite valley, Calif. Agri. Bull., 36.
15 Stewart, O. C. (1956). Fire as the first great force employed by man, in
    Thomas, W. L. (ed.) Man’s Role in Changing the Face of the Earth.
    London, pp. 115-33.
16 Grieg, O. and Rankine, W. F. (1956). A stone age settlement system near
   East Week, Dartmoor, Proc. Devon Arch, and Expl. Soc., 5, pp. 8-25.
17 The full profiles, of which figs. 1-3 are extracts, are published in Simmons,
    I. G. (In press). Pollen diagrams from the North York Moors, New
    Phytol, 68.
