       30 Herodotus, 7, 40 and 7, 113; Livy, 5, 28, 5; Tacitus, Germania, 10, etc.
       31 Weidner, E. A. (1952). Weisse Pferde im alten Orient, Bibliotheca
           Orientalis, 9 (5-6), pp. 157 ff.
      32 Schaeffer, C. F. A. (1949). Ugaritica, 2 (Mission de Ras Shamra, 5).
          Paris, p. 13.
      33 Schulman, A. R. (1957). Egyptian Representations of Horsemen and
          Riding in the New Kingdom, J. of Near Eastern Studies, 16, pp. 263 ff.
      34 I have to thank Mr. H. J. Case for this explanation; he says further “to
          keep his balance he instinctively tries to close his calves and heels round
          the belly. This excites the animal and makes him trot faster; and places
          the rider (with his pelvis tilted forward) in a highly uncomfortable position
          and one in which he has little control, should the pony suddenly break
          into a fast canter or gallop. Chariot-horses were equally spectacular and
          less liable to lapses of dignity.”
      35 Leclant, A. (i960). Astarte a cheval d’apres les representations egyptiennes,
          Syria, 37, pp. 1 fit.
      36 Bittel, K., Heere, W. and Otten, H. (1958). Die hethitischen Grabfunde
          von Osmankayasi. Bogazkoy-Hattusa, 2. pp. 60-4.
      37 Oppenheim, A. L. (1950). Review of Figulla, H. H. (1949). Business Docu¬
          ments of the New Babylonian Period. London, J. Cuneiform Soc., 4,
          pp. 191 ff.
      38 Porada, E. (1965). Ancient Iran. London, pp. 75 ff. and pp. 234 ff.
      39 In discussion.
      40 Bokonyi, S. (1954). Les chevaux scythiques de Szentes-Vekerzug 2. Les
          fouilles de 1952-3, Acta Arch. Hung., 4.
      41 Hilzheimer, M. (1955). The evolution of the domestic horse. Antiquity,
          9, pp. 133 ff.
      42 Ghirshman, R. (1954). La village perse-achemenide, Mem. de la Mission
          archeologique en Iran, 36, pp. 38 ff.
      43 Golomshtok, E. A. and Griaznov, M. P. (1933). The Pazirik burial of
          Altai, Amer J. Archaeology, 37, pp. 30 ff; Talbot Rice, T. (1965). The
          Scythians. London, pp. 70 ff.
      44 Bokonyi, S. (1954). op. cit. pp. 100 ff.
      45 Antonius, O. (1922). Grundzuge einer Stammesgeschichte der Haustiere.
          Jena. p. 287.
      46 Recently Talbot Rice, T. (1965). ibid.
      47 Lhote, H. (1953). Le Cheval et le Chameau dans les peintures et gravures
          rupestres du Sahara, Bull, de VInst. fran$ais de VAfrique noir, pp. 1138 ff.
      48 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). op. cit. pp. 330 ff.
       J. G. EVANS

       The exploitation of molluscs


 Molluscs have been exploited by man from the earliest times and for a wide
 variety of purposes. For instance, the extraction of the crimson dye, Tyrian
 Purple, from the dog winkles Murex spp. and Nucella spp., was known to both
the Phoenicians and the Minoans1. A vast quantity of shells was needed for
this process (about 8000 per gram of dye). Each shell was struck at a particular
point to remove the small gland which yields the dye, and such a technique
leaves clear evidence of the use to which the animals were put2. Another
pigment used in antiquity was Roman Sepia, obtained from the cuttlefish.
Where stone was scarce, strong shells were often used for raw materials as in
the manufacture of adze-blades from Tridacna on the coral islands of Poly¬
nesia. The shell of Cardium, the cockle, was used by neolithic people of the
Mediterranean for stamping their impressed-ware pottery (cardial decora¬
tion)3 though it should be pointed out that not all cardial decoration was
necessarily produced in this way, other sharp implements being used to
produce a similar effect. Mother-of-pearl, the nacreous lining of bivalve
shells, has always been a popular material, for inlay as in the Standard of Ur
and some of the grave furniture from Tutankhamen’s tomb, and more
recently for buttons and knife handles. Shells are often found far from the
sea in contexts which, at least on the basis of some modern ethnographic
parallels, suggest some sort of magico-religious association with the place of
origin of the culture4. A classic example is that of the mussel, Spondylus
gaederopus, found on Danubian sites as far north as the Rhineland from its
source in the Eastern Mediterranean5. From this may have evolved the idea of
shell trade or currency, although it is very possible that the latter developed in
some instances independently where there was a lack of metals. There are
innumerable examples too in prehistory of the adornment of the living and
the dead with shells, those of Dentalium, the tusk shell, being particularly
favoured. It is important in this connection to recognize however that the
perforation of shells may be done not by man but by certain predatory
molluscs8; this does not, of course, exclude the collection and use of such
perforated shells for necklaces and bangles. Among the earliest objects used
by man for personal adornment were pearls.
480   Part IV Animals     EVANS


   It is for their exploitation as a supply of food, however, that molluscs are
particularly noted and with which this paper is mainly concerned. The more
important food molluscs are the bivalves such as oysters, cockles and mussels;
the marine snails such as whelks, periwinkles and abalones; the cephalopods—
cuttlefish, octopus and squid; and the land snails7. The bivalves and marine
snails comprise part of the group popularly known as shellfish; the rest of this
group includes animals such as the crab and lobster which are not molluscs
but crustaceans and will not be discussed here.
    In the palaeolithic period shellfish were eaten by coastal-dwelling people
when and where available—for example by Mousterians at Devil’s Tower,
Gibraltar8—but there seems never to have been any special emphasis on
shellfish as a basic part of the economy. It was in the mesolithic period that
shellfish were exploited to their fullest, in some cases to the virtual exclusion
of all other types of animal food, and people who subsisted by this means have
been given the name “strandloopers”. Among the more important of these are
the Canalino culture of California9, the Hoabhinians and Toalians of the Far
East10, the Capsians of North Africa and the Tagus Valley in Spain11, the
Asturians of Cantalabria12, the Tardenoisians of Brittany13, the Ertebolle
people of Denmark14, and the Larnians and Obanians of North-west Britain15.
    The origin of this mode of life may be argued to have been a quite normal
one for coastal-dwelling people. However, in Western Europe the adoption
of a strandlooping existence is associated with the spread of the forests after
the end of the last glaciation, and a restriction of open areas available to
mesolithic man for hunting who is thus driven to the coasts to seek a liveli¬
hood. In California it is associated with a decrease in the area of forest and a
consequent reduction in the amount of game. In some cases there is an associa¬
tion with an island or coastal economy, where a ready supply of food of larger
animals was not available. Thus the rise in sea-level during the post-glacial
 period increased the length of coastline per surface area of land; and a close
 association is found for instance between sites of the Ertebolle culture with the
 ancient shore-line of the Littorina sea10. Perhaps too, strandloopers were
 peoples driven to the coasts by others living inland better able to cope with
 the conditions there. In some cases a shellfish economy is a seasonal occupa¬
 tion.
    The point at any rate seems clear: some kind of environmental change
 causes the mode of life of a people to be changed, from a primarily hunting
 or mixed economy to one based largely on food-gathering. Shellfish are as
 nourishing as a meat diet, if eked out by vegetable food; they contain large
 quantities of glycogen and need not be added to by animal flesh; moreover,
 their abundance per unit area is greater than that of any other food animal. But
 they do involve a lot of wasted labour in collecting since they produce the
 greatest bulk of refuse for a given quantity of edible substance17. The situa¬
 tion is neatly summarized as follows: “One suspects . . . that shellfish, as a
 main article of food, were eaten for lack of something better rather than from
                                              The exploitation of molluscs   481


choice—perhaps in bad seasons, in winter or when in unfamiliar surround¬
ings, so that the better potentialities of the place had still to be learned”18.
Indeed in certain cases, for example the Hoabhinians, strandloopers became
better able to cope with a variety of environments, with time evolving from an
economy based solely on shellfish to a mixed one of food-gathering and hunt¬
ing.
   An economy based to a large extent on shellfish occurred in many places
during the neolithic and later periods, but not to the universal extent of the
mesolithic period. Most characteristic are the impressed-ware sites where
poverty-striken peasants subsisted on a diet of shellfish but eked out also by
domestic cattle, as for example with the Sipontiano culture of Coppa Nevigata
in Italy19.
   The effect of man and other environmental factors on shellfish populations
can be studied on archaeological sites, and this is particularly so with sand
middens where a technique known as column sampling can be applied20. This
involves taking bulk samples at intervals through a vertical column of deposits
and analysing them for shellfish remains. The results can then be plotted in
the form of a histogram as has been done in Fig. 1 for a prehistoric site in the
Isle of Harris, Inverness. The basic diet on this site was of marine shellfish
with domestic animals, and certain foods (possibly delicacies) such as the
oyster, Ostrea edulis, and the freshwater mussel, Margaritifera margaritifera.




Fig 1 Diagram showing changes in relative abundance of various food
     molluscs in a prehistoric midden at Northton, Isle of Harris, Scotland.
482    Part IV Animals     Evans

 Similarly on a Californian site of the Canalino culture a change from an
 economy based largely on abalone to one on mussels took place. Changes such
 as these reflect differences in availability of the various species. In the
 Californian case this was caused by man for the abalone was eaten out of
 existence. But availability may also depend on environmental factors;
 Cardium, for example, is most abundant in estuaries on a muddy substratum,
 while Patella and Mytilus are more common on rocky shores. Changes in the
 availability of such substrata may relate to changes of sea-level and thus be
 reflected in man’s economy. Man may also exploit a small number of shellfish
 species to a much greater extent than the majority for reasons perhaps of
 seasonal availability, ease of collection or edibility, and severe depletion of the
 stock may eventually lead to extinction and enable other species to build up
 their numbers which are then taken over as a food supply21. Changes caused
thus by man may be accentuated by the natural enemies of shellfish, while
 climatic changes, notably of temperature, may also result in population
 changes22.
    But while exploitation may lead to changes in the composition of shellfish
 populations there is no evidence to suggest that shellfish have ever been
 “domesticated”; i.e. selectively bred to produce a stock which differs genetic¬
ally from the wild ancestor. Domestication as a natural process under con¬
ditions of association with man is highly unlikely when one considers how
remote is the biological contact between man and mollusc, each occupying an
entirely different life medium. And exploitation will never lead towards domes¬
tication, only away from it, sometimes resulting even in extinction. Deliberate
domestication too is a practical impossibility since the method of reproduc¬
tion involves the releases of the gametes into the sea, so that there can be little
control over mating. The cultivation of oysters is perhaps the closest to
domestication but even here what is accomplished only affects growth, in
order to obtain a maximum yield per area of sea bed, without in any way
altering the genetic make-up of the stock.
   1 urning to land snails, where the environmental medium is rather closer
to that of man, the possibilities of domestication taking place are greater. In
prehistoric times, land snails were exploited often to the same extent as
marine molluscs—to wit, the vast shell middens of the North African
Capsians known as escargotieres—and as with marine molluscs selective
exploitation sometimes took place. Thus in Iran, Reed has shown how Helix
salomonica was exploited in favour of the apparently equally abundant and
acceptable Levantina diulfensis23, while Cain has suggested the avoidance of
certain morphs of the polymorphic snail, H. nemoralis, at an Iron Age site in
England, perhaps for religious reasons24; this latter is of interest in being an
example of intraspecific exploitation. But such processes must surely lead
away from domestication, not towards it.
   Deliberate domestication of a species of large snail (probably H. pomatia)
seems to have been accomplished by the Romans, variations being kept
                                                 The exploitation of molluscs    483


separate in vivaria and bred for such characters as size, colour, and fecundity25.
 This practice, however, has not been maintained and one suspects that it was
 from the first more of an academic experiment rather than a policy engendered
 by economic hardship.
    Under more natural conditions, the association of snails and man has not
led to domestication but it is interesting to see how this association has
become closer since the neolithic period and along lines which might well
have resulted in domestication. The greatest initial impact of man on the
environment was during the neolithic period and such changes as were pro¬
duced affected the snail population more then than at any subsequent time.
At first, changes in the populations of mollusca were a direct reflection of
environmental changes. Shade- and moisture-loving species were either
greatly suppressed, becoming restricted to area undisturbed by man, or were
eliminated totally. Xerophiles and heliophiles, however, flourished and
colonized large tracts of previously wooded country. With time, certain
species of both the shade-loving and the xerophile/heliophile groups altered
their ecology to the extent that they came to live in such close association
with human habitations as to become almost entirely dependent on man for
their existence26. Such molluscs are distinguished as synanthropic and it is
these, if any, which might have become domesticated. But this is as far as the
process has gone. Thus the synanthropic species, H. aspersa and H. pomatia,
are both edible and eaten to the present day in Britain and the Continent; but
there is no question of domestication, only of collection during certain
seasons.
   Thus while the example of the Romans shows that the potential is there,
land snails have not become domesticated either through deliberate selective
breeding or through a more natural association with man. The reasons for
this are various but connected perhaps with the fact that molluscs are of little
hindrance to man in the wild state, and yet are sufficiently abundant to be
profitably collected on a mesolithic food-gathering basis.




      Notes
      1 Jackson, J. W. (1916). The geographical distribution of the shell-purple
        industry, Memoirs and Proc. Manchester Lit. and Phil. Soc., 60 (7).
      2 Information from W. T. Stearn (in discussion).
      3 Childe, V. G. (1957). The Dawn of European Civilization. London, p. 58.
      4 Jackson, J. W. (1917). Shells as evidence of the migrations of Early Culture.
        London.
      5 Clark, J. G. D. (1952). Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. London,
        pp. 241-3. It appears to be uncertain whether Spondylus gaederopus does
        in "fact occur in the Black Sea as quoted by Clark. (N. Shackleton, Per¬
        sonal communication).
      6 Ansell, A. D. (i960). Observations on predation of Venus striatula (da
        Costa) by Natica alderi (Forbes), Proc. Malacol. Soc., 34, pp. 157-64.
484   Part IV Animals      EVANS


       7 Symposium on Edible Molluscs (i960). Proc. Malacol. Soc., 34, pp.
          113-56.
       8 Garrod, D. A. E. et al. (1928). Excavation of a Mousterian rock-shelter at
          Devil’s Tower, Gibraltar, J. Roy. Anthrop. Inst., 58, pp. 34-113.
       9 Meighan, C. W. et al. (1958). Ecological interpretation in archaeology:
         part I, Amer. Antiq., 24, pp. 1-23.
      10 Cornwall, I. W. (1964). The World of Ancient Man. London.
      11 Balout, L. (1955). Prehistoire de TAfrique du Nord. Paris; Obermaier, H.
          (1925). Fossil Man in Spain. Yale.
      12 Obermaier, H. (1925). ibid.
      13 Just Pequart, M. and St. (1954). Hoedic. Anvers.
      14 Clark, J. G. D. (1936). The Mesolithic Settlement of Northern Europe.
          Cambridge.
      15 Lacaille, A. D. (1954). The Stone Age in Scotland. Oxford; Movius, N. J.,
         Jr. (1942). The Irish Stone Age. Cambridge.
      16 Clark, J. G. D. (1936). ibid.
      17 Townsend, M. (1967). The common limpet (Patella vulgata) as a source
          of protein, Folia Biologica, 15, pp. 343-51.
      18 Cornwall, I. W. (1964). op. cit. p. 223.
      19 Puglisi, S. M. (1955). Industria microlitica nei livelli a ceramica impressa
          di Coppa Nevigata, Riv. Sci. Prehist., 10, pp. 19-37.
      20 Meighan, C. W. et al. (1958). ibid.
      21 For instance, in France today, the oyster which is mainly cultivated is
          Ostrea angulata; before 1914 only the more northerly O. edulis was
         present: while in the mesolithic period, both species were present. See
         Just Pequart, M. and St. (1954). ibid.
      22 Thus in the shell mounds of the Asturians, Monodonta (Trochus) lineata
         replaces Littorina littorea, the latter being the characteristic form of the
          Upper Palaeolithic and Azilian middens; this change is said to be climatic¬
          ally caused.
      23 Reed, C. A. (1962). Snails on a Persian hillside: Ecology, Prehistory-
          gastronomy, Postilla:Yale Peabody Mus., 66.
      24 Cain, A. J. (1967). The large snails, in Avery, M. et al. Rainsborough,
         Northants, England: Excavations 1961-5, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 33, pp.
          305-6.
      25 Pliny’s Natural History. 9, p. 173.
      26 Kerney, M. P. (1965). Snails and man in Britain, J. Concho!., 26, pp. 3-14.
      DUNCAN NOBLE

      The Mesopotamian onager as a draught animal


The Mesopotamian onager is an extinct member of the family of half-asses
now represented by the common or Persian onager and the Indian onager. It
became extinct in the early twentieth century when it succumbed to the
effects of continued hunting and the depredations of troops in the First
World War. The last reported sighting of Mesopotamian onagers was by the
traveller Carl Raswan1 in the late twenties of this century near the Jebel
Sinjar. In 1928 one was in the Schonbrunn Zoo, Vienna2, and a photograph
survives.
  The Mesopotamian onager was a light, swift, animal standing one metre
(nine hands three inches) at the withers according to Antonius3 and was as
fast as the horse, if without its staying powers. Its ears were longer than the
horse’s but shorter than those of the ass and the Indian onager. It had the
erect mane of the wild horse but was distinguishable by the tail which was
tufted from half way along its length. It appears from its muzzled representa¬
tions to have been a difficult animal to use and not ideal for draught purposes.
The Director of Whipsnade Park of the Zoological Society of London states4
of the Persian onagers in his keeping that they are unhandleable and indeed
unapproachable with inherently intractable dispositions and, while reasonably
fleet of foot, are narrow-chested—not the sign of a good draught animal.
  From evidence of onagers’ bones at Anau, level I5, c. 4800 b.c., and Sialk
II6 c. 3500 b.c. there is no doubt that onagers7 were hunted for food in
prehistoric times, as they were later by the Assyrians and the Arabs. But it is
from Sumerian levels (c. 2500 b.c.) and the Uruk period preceding that the
Mesopotamian onager appears as a draught animal.
 It may be that clay discs from Tepe Gawra XVIII c. 4000 b.c. represent
wheels and a Halaf sherd from level XVI c. 3900 b.c. shows two onagers.
Thereafter the first clear indication of the use of wheeled vehicles is in
pictograms from tablets from Uruk level IV c. 3100 b.c. Terracotta model
wagons and chariots appear in Tepe Gawra VIII in the Jemdet Nasr level
c. 3000 b.c. and in Sumerian Early Dynastic times (2370-2900 b.c.) vehicles
occur in considerable numbers as models, paintings on pottery, and chariot
burials at Ur, Kish, and Susa. That a considerable number of these wagons
486   Part IV Animals     NOBLE


and chariots were pulled by onagers is clear from the shell inlay called the
Standard of Ur8 (Plate Ia) and the mother-of-pearl fragments of the
Standard of Mari9, and from a scarlet ware vase from Khafaje from an E.D.I.
level and a bronze model from Tell Agrab (E.D.III.) (Plate Ib).
   That the onager was ridden is less certain and we depend for our informa¬
tion on terracotta models of riders from Susa from which the animal is not
easily identified. It appears likely that if the onager was ridden, it was not so
used as a regular means of transport.
   The war panel on the Standard from the Royal Tombs of Ur shows in its
lowest register four successive stages of the charge of a chariot against a
barbarian enemy. It is a heavy vehicle with four solid wheels, each made of
three planks. The body has a wooden framework and a high front to which is
lashed a quiver of javelins. The framework is panelled in leather or basket-
work and models from Susa10 have markings indicating that basketry was
used. The vehicle is drawn by four onagers harnessed abreast to a yoke
lashed to the curved pole which is attached to the base of the chariot. On the
pole is a double ring through which the reins pass and the onagers are yoked
by their collars from which hang pointed streamers which would increase
their frightening aspect. Also from Ur comes a rein ring surmounted by a
statuette of an onager. As the yoke is not visible in the inlay, it is most likely
that it extends over the withers of the inner beasts only and the collars of the
outer animals are lashed to its extremities. This interpretation is borne out by
the chariot from Tell Agrab described below. The animals have headstalls
whose nosebands extend forward, partially to muzzle them. This conclusion
is reinforced by the heads of onagers shown on the fragments of the stylistic¬
ally similar inlays found in the temples of Ishtar and Ninni-Zaza at Mari. The
fragment from the early dynastic temple of Ishtar shows a headstall essentially
identical to the Ur one, and those from the slightly later temple of Ninni-
Zaza illustrate headstalls with muzzles of plaited material covering the lower
jaw and also the whole muzzle—a subsequent modification.
   The question of how the animals were controlled has been discussed. A
ring is shown in front of the Ur onagers’ noses and Woolley11 considered that
it represented the rings of a bit, while noting that the oxen which pulled the
king’s essentially similar car found in grave PG/789 were guided by a ring
through the nostrils. Hilzheimer12 thought that the reins were attached to the
headstall. But Schaeffer13 has come to what appears to be the correct con¬
clusion in finding from a comparison of the Ur and Mari inlays that the ring
was in fact passed through the flesh of the upper lip.
   The crew consisted of the driver who wielded a long forked goad to urge on
his animals and standing behind him a soldier shown carrying at one time a
javelin and at another an axe.
  To gain an idea of the size of the vehicles we note that the ox wagons of
grave PG/789 had wheels of diameter between 60 and 100 cm. From the Y
cemetery at Kish in grave Y237 (E.D.III) comes a burial with a four-wheeled
                           The Mesopotamian onager as a draught animal        487


 wagon pulled by equids of which the excavator was able to distinguish the
wheels and the chassis and curved hoops on the sides which suggest that it
was a freight vehicle. It had wheels of 50 cm. diameter with axles 90 cm. long
and the chassis was 45 cm. wide. This suggests that the chariots were long
narrow vehicles and with hardwood being used in their construction the Ur
 Standard ones would have had a tare weight of 275 kg. (605 lb.) or up to
410 kg. (900 lb.) with crew. The Kish chariot had bronze nails studded round
the rim of the wheels although these are not shown in the Ur and Mari
chariots. But round the wheels of the Ur ox waggons Woolley was able to
distinguish a grey powder which he took to be the remains of leather tyres.
   Terracotta models from Tepe Gawra14 and Kish A cemetery15 (E.D.III)
and Susa16 show two-wheeled versions of the type of conveyance described
above with a high front often with two holes for the reins to pass through.
But a different type is evidenced by a bronze model found in an E.D.II
context at Tell Agrab17 and by a terracotta model from the A cemetery at
Kish18. The Tell Agrab model portrays four onagers yoked as were the
Ur Standard beasts to a two-wheeled chariot with a straight pole which
forms also the body of the car astride which sits the driver who has before
him a high wooden protection of two upright timbers with a semi-circular
top. The wheels are again solid, made of planks, and protected by pointed
bronze nails round the rim.
   The Kish model has a body which is rounded like a saddle with the marks
of a fleece thrown over it while the front is square with crossed struts like the
Ur chariots. A limestone plaque from the Third Dynasty of Ur19 shows a
chariot pulled by felines and it is also like a saddle with a leopard skin thrown
over it.
   We notice that there are no nails in the wheels of the four-wheeled Ur and
Mari chariots which are definitely used for war, while they are found on two¬
wheeled chariots and also on the four-wheeled chariot on the Khafaje vase
which appears to be a processional vehicle. As there is no evidence of a
swinging front axle, it may be that while in a light two-wheeled chariot or
peaceful wagon the nails contributed greatly to lateral stability, in a fighting
chariot smooth leather tyres gave adequate protection to the wheels and yet
allowed them to slide sideways when cornering at speed. But turning must
have been difficult as from the Tell Agrab model we know that the lip ring
on the outer animal on the left was attached by a single rein to the ring
through its companion’s lip from which led a rein which the driver held in his
left hand while he guided the other pair in similar fashion with a rein in his
right hand. To turn to the left the driver pulled in on his left-hand rein, there¬
by checking his left pair and at the same time pulling it to the right and away
from the direction of the turn. The collar, pressing on the animals’ wind
pipes and jugular veins would at the same time reduce the control and their
tractive effort.
   The chariots which the driver sat asu ide can hardly have been used against
           *   *
17—DOPAA
488    Part IV Animals        noble


an enemy as the driver would have been fully occupied with his team and
unable to defend himself. Rather must they have been used for scouting or as
a commander’s personal transport. With the four-wheeled chariots little
manoeuvre can have been possible. We may consider that the onagers were
pointed in the desired direction and held by grooms until the opportune
moment when they were launched against the foe. The soldier’s axe and spear
can only have been for personal defence as four animals would cut a swathe
two and a half metres wide through the enemy ranks and any persons within
reach would already have been trampled over. As the enemy line was
approached the spearman can have had time to throw only two spears before
the chariot passed through the opposing forces or was brought to a stand¬
still. The real weapon was the onagers’ hooves and the effect was psycho¬
logical rather than material.
   And then in Akkadian times, c. 2300 B.c., with the introduction of the more
dependable horse, the onager for ever passed out of use as a draught animal.



      Notes
        1 Raswan, C. R. (1935). Black Tents of Arabia. Boston.
       2 Antonius, O. (1928-9). Der syrische Halbesel, Der zoologische Garten, 1,
          pp.19-25.
       3 Antonius, O. (1928-9). ibid.
       4 Personal communication.
       5 Pumpelly, R. (1908). (1908). Explorations in Turkestan, Expedition of
          1904. 2. Washington.
       6 Ghirshman, R. (1938-9). Fouilles de Sialk. Paris.
       7 The excavators identify the Anau and Sialk equids as horses but Zeuner,
          F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London, p. 316, identifies
          them as onagers.
       8 Woolley, C. L. (1934). Ur Excavations II, The Royal Cemetery. London,
          pp. 269-73 and pi. 92.
       9 Parrot, A. (1956). Mission archeologique de Mari, I: Le Temple d'Ishtar.
          Paris, pp. 136-46 and pi. LVI.
      10 Mecquenem, R. de. (1943). Memoires de la Mission Archeologique en Iran,
          29. Archeologie Susienne, Paris. Fig. 91b.
      11 Woolley, C. L. (1934). op. cit. p. 270.
      12 Hilzheimer, M. (1931). Die Anschurrung bei den alten Sumerien,
         Praehistorische Z.
      13 Schaeffer, C. L. (1938). Contribution a l’etude de 1’attelage Sumerien et
         Syrien aux Ille et lie millenaires, Prehistoire, 6.
      14 Speiser, E. A. (1935)- Excavations at Tepe Gawra, I. Philadelphia, pis.
         XXXIVc and LXXVIII.
      15 MacKay, E. (1929). A Sumerian Palace and the A cemetery at Kish,
         Mesopotamia, Chicago, pi. XLVI.
      16 Mecquenem, R. de. (1943). op. cit. pi. XLVI. 3.
      17 Prankfort, H. (1937). Revelations of early Mesopotamian culture. Illus¬
         trated London News, 6 (Nov.); Frankfort, H. (1943). More Sculpture from
         the Diyala Region. Chicago, p. 12.
      18 MacKay, E. (1929). op. cit. pi. XLVI. 7.
      19 Woolley, C. L. (1934). op. cit. pi. 181b.
       CLIFFORD OWEN

       The domestication of the ferret


 The three lines of investigation used in studying domestication are archae¬
 ological, zoological, and historical.
    In studying the ferret only the second two have been pursued. This
 communication suggests ways in which attention to the problem by archae¬
 ologists might be of real value.
   A very brief outline of what is known will be given and suggestions made
for work needing to be done.
   Historical material starts with a mention by Aristophanes1, c. 450 B.C., in a
comedy, of an animal which might have been the ferret, followed by Aristotle2,
c. 350 B.C., but the correct translation of the Greek word used has been the
subject of much argument. Although Aristotle states that this animal could
become very mild and tame, there is reason to suppose that other members of
the weasel tribe may have been kept in a semi-domesticated state for the
control of small rodents. These references gave rise to considerable philo¬
logical discussion in the sixteenth century but the issue remains undecided.
   The first reference which can be said with any probability to relate to the
ferret is that of Strabo3 (fl. about 63 B.c. to A.D. 24). He states that a Libyan
animal, bred purposely, was muzzled and put into rabbit holes when it
either pulls out the rabbit with its claws or causes it to bolt to the men and
dogs standing ready. The fact that this method is still used by the Ruafa of
Morocco suggests that it is an accurate and authentic description, and that
the animal used was the ferret.
   The use of the ferret for rabbit catching would appear to have been the
reason for the domestication of this somewhat troublesome animal and its use
is associated with the spread of the rabbit as a semi-domesticated food animal
and, later, a feral species. The rabbit appears originally to have been in¬
digenous to Spain and possibly North Africa; the occasion for Strabo’s
remarks was a plague of rabbits in the Balearic Islands, to which they had
been introduced. The use of the ferret for killing rats is not mentioned until
later,. It appears to have been less important than its use in rabbiting, and this
contribution will be confined to a discussion of the latter use. However, rat¬
ting should be borne in mind in the appropriate contexts.
490   Part IV Animals     OWEN


   Pliny4 (a.d. 23-79) also mentions the rabbit and the ferret. The next
reference is in a.d. 600, by Isidore of Seville5, to the ferret and rabbit¬
hunting. After this, as is to be expected, references are scarce until mediaeval
manuscripts. Many of these contain variations of what Aristotle said; little
of real value can be found until the habit of observation and reporting of
contemporary life became established.
   Then, some idea of the extent of the spread of both rabbit and ferret
can be gathered. Illustrations in manuscripts provide evidence for the breed¬
ing of domesticated rabbits of different colours (black and white) by 1516,
and for the existence of rabbit warrens and the use of ferrets. The most
important of these is a splendid copy of the Livre de Chasse of Gaston, Comte
de Foixs, who reigned over two principalities in Southern France and
Northern Spain. This copy shows ferreting in full swing with purse nets,
and a ferret wearing a muzzle. Gaston de Foix wrote this book between 1st
May 1387 and his death about four years later.
   In the thirteenth century references to ferrets show that they had spread
northwards to Germany before 1245. It is frequently stated that Genghis
Khan used ferrets at Termed in 1221. Termed is probably Termez, on the
Oxus river, about 160 miles south of Samarkand. The statement comes from
an English book of 18267, derived from a French work of 17228, quoting from
a compilation attributed to the Imam Mehemet bin Ahmed Azzahabi, born in
Cairo and died in Samarkand in 1345. It is important that the work by
Azzahabi be traced if possible. Dr. M. Lings of the British Museum has
kindly offered to look into the problem. Until the result of his investigation is
known it would perhaps be advisable to treat this evidence of the use of the
ferret in Afghanistan with reserve.
   Queen Mary’s Psalter of about 1340 shows ferrets being used by well-
dressed women but the translation of Gaston de Foix, made by Edward 2nd
Duke of York during his captivity in Pevensey Castle between 1406 and 1413,
has an interpolation to the effect that no one hunts rabbits except fur-
hunters—indicating that this form of the chase may not have enjoyed the
same esteem as it did on the continent of Europe by that period.
   Earlier references to the ferret can be found in laws and court rolls. The
first known in England is for 1223 and there are references to a ferreter
attached to the Court in 1281. References to the ownership of ferrets by a
Bishop and a Prior indicate the importance of rabbits to church establish¬
ments ; a law limiting the ownership of ferrets to those with an annual income
of forty shillings, passed in 1390, indicates that by that time poaching was a
problem. Warrens were carefully designed; sometimes walled or paled; and
where necessary had raised banks to provide dry quarters for the rabbits. It
can be taken that wherever warrens were established ferrets were used, and
were therefore important items in the domestic economy.
   The circulation of printed books marks another increment in the informa¬
tion on the ferret. It was accurately described in Conrad Gesner’s9 work on
                                             The domestication of the ferret   491


  quadrupeds, published at Zurich in 1551. Gesner describes it as the colour of
  wool stained with urine—which gives a very good impression of die colour of
  the white ferret, here mentioned for the first time. The original ferret was
  undoubtedly the colour of a wild polecat and we do not know at what period
  the break to white occurred. The only earlier reference to colour is by implica¬
  tion in the poem “The Siege of Thebes” by John of Lydgate10 (probably
  written in 1421) where the red eyes of the ferret are mentioned. As only white
  ferrets have red eyes it is probable that a white ferret is meant.
     Consideration of the colour of the animal brings us to an appraisal of the
  zoological evidence on the possible origin of the domestic form. The ferret’s
  ancestor is the wild polecat. There are two forms—eastern and western. The
 present distribution of these forms is not accurately known; nor is their
 taxonomic position, their previous distribution, nor the precise region where
 the animal was domesticated. It has been claimed that the ferret was domesti¬
 cated in Morocco from a wild species; the writer does not think this is proven
 and his evidence for this view is in preparation11. Attempts to equate the ferret
 with one or other of these wild forms have mostly depended on comparison of
 skull measurements, and opinions have varied. The most sophisticated of
 these attempts has used multivariate analysis. In the view of Udo Rempe the
 ferret is derived from the western form of polecat. The present writer has
 endeavoured to compare the behaviour and ease of taming and breeding of
 the two forms but has unfortunately been unable to obtain live specimens of
 the eastern polecat. If (as discussed by Rohrs12) the idea of domestication
 travelled rather than the animal itself it is possible that both the eastern and
 western forms were domesticated.
    The material used has been skulls of modem polecats and ferrets from
 museum collections and this leads naturally to the question of the skull
 characteristics of ferrets used in the earlier period of its use.
    The archaeological material bearing on this problem is remarkable for its
complete absence. Out of all the activity, year in year out, of providing
considerable quantities of food by the use of the ferret—nothing remains. The
whole purpose of this communication is to bring to light material unknown to
the writer and to make it more likely that relevant material is not overlooked.
The bones of ferrets, like those of the rabbits they pursue, are difficult:
first, many archaeologists do not save small bones or may not record them
adequately—this practice, though diminishing, regrettably persists; secondly,
rabbits are the most intrusive creatures and ferrets have to follow them. Only
in exceptional cases is one able to exclude the possibility of contamination by
later burrowing. It is therefore vital to treat with extreme care any rabbit or
ferret bones underneath sealed layers, and to save carefully every piece of
skeletal material and any possible associated objects.
    Objects which could be associated with ferreting are not many and their
identification is difficult. Those most frequently mentioned are muzzles and
nets—both unlikely to survive. However, there are some more robust items.
492   Part IV Animals      OWEN


Bells were frequently used to alarm the rabbits and to cause them to run
before they could be caught.
   Although ferret bells are not recorded this is not as surprising as it might
seem. They would be difficult to distinguish from bells used as ornaments of
dress or for falconry and hawking—they might be readily linked with the
merlin, sparrowhawk or kestrel.
   However, the illustration of a ferret in Gesner (PI. iv b) perhaps shows it
wearing what may be the type of bell used—which is not like bells used for
falconry today. In 1378 eight white iron chains for ferrets are included in an
inventory of a haberdasher’s shop. It would be impossible to determine their
use if recovered from the site today.
   Muzzles may have been made of metal, though the practice of tying the lips
of a ferret together through a hole in the upper and nether lip on each side
would make these superfluous. There is an interesting mention of silver rings
being used for this purpose in Lower Germany and a report that gipsies in
England knew of this practice in the present century is of interest. A number
of patterns of metal muzzle are in use today but the date of their introduction
is unknown—several of them appear to be of nineteenth-century origin.
Ancillary tools, for digging out ferrets which “lay up”, often of a special
shape, were commonly used—but these are difficult to separate from agri¬
cultural implements or tools used for digging out foxes or badgers. Boxes and
bags were used for carrying ferrets and these might be identifiable.
   In order to assist in the classification of these objects it would help if sites
of mediaeval establishments of importance could be searched for the place in
which ferrets were kept. Objects found in such places would possibly be for
use with ferrets and themselves might establish the use of the building. The
household books of the Lord William Howard of Naworth Castle13 (1618-33)
give some idea of what might be found. The Warrener had a house with a
slate roof which may have had a brick floor. He had a wallet for his ferrets,
seven yards of coarse cloth for his bed, eight yards of cloth for a pair of
blankets, a hank of yarn for mending his net, a paddle staff with iron on it,
traps made by the man who mended the wains, probably of wood, but
possibly of iron, a ferret line and, in 1622, a room was made for the ferrets at
Cumrach. This, and the wages paid to him, indicate that he was a servant of
some importance and that a warrener might occupy a house sturdy enough to
present substantial remains. Among these, or in the room for the ferrets,
might be found objects related to his work. The accommodation for the
ferrets in this case seems to have been distinguishable but in many cases
they may have been kept in wooden hutches, or in barrels—a common
practice for hundreds of years.
   Careful watch for evidence of ferreting can then be expected to yield
results in remains of houses of servants, in outhouses, and in the raised banks
of made warrens which, it is suggested in “The Countrie Farme”14, should be
sited between the hilly and the fertile ground of a Park, and near to the Lodge,
                                           The domestication of the ferret   493


and possibly represented in Britain by the “pillow-mounds” of Crawford15.
   In earlier or simpler communities the ferret may have been tethered, as in
Morocco today, in a section of cork-oak bark hung from the roof of the
dwelling house. The use of nets or metal accessories would be unknown.
Under these circumstances ferret skeletons within the house area would be of
significance.
   The writer would be most grateful for notice of any known material
evidence of the use of the ferret, up to and including the mid-nineteenth
century.



      Notes
      1 Aristophanes. The Acharnians.
      2 Aristotle. Historia Animalium.
      3 Strabo. Geographica, Book III 2. 6.
      4 Pliny’s Natural History. 8, 55.
      5 Isidore. Patrologie. 1850. Paris.
      6 Gaston Phebus, Comte de Foix. MS Francais 616, Bibliotheque Nationale,
        Paris.
      7 Ranking, J. (1826). Historical Researches on the Wars and Sports of the
        Mongols. London.
      8 Croix, Petis de la (1722). The History of Genghizcan the Great. London.
      9 Gesner, C. (1551). Historiae Animalium. Zurich.
     10 Lydgate, John. (c. 1421). Siege of Thebes. Early English Text. Soc. Extra
        Series, 1911.
     11 Owen, C. E. In preparation.
     12 Rohrs, M. (1961). Biologische Anschauungen fiber Begriff v. Wesen der
        Domestikation, Z. Tierzucht. Ziicht Biol., 76 (i), pp. 7-23.
     13 Selections from the Household books of the Lord William Howard of
        Naworth Castle. 1878. Surtees Soc. 68.
     14 Estienne, C. (1586). Maison Rustique.
     15 Crawford, O. G. S. and Keiller, A. (1928). Wessex from the Air. Oxford.
      M. L. RYDER

      Changes in the fleece of sheep following domestication
      (with a note on the coat of cattle)


Although it seems clear that the coat of cattle has changed far less than that of
sheep since domestication, it is fortunate that the wild form of sheep is still in
existence to demonstrate the extent of the change in sheep, which has been
brought about mainly through the selective breeding by man towards
different kinds of fleeces suitable for textiles.
   The main changes that have occurred in the coat of the sheep are as
follows:

1 Pigment has been lost; wild sheep, and some primitive domestic breeds are
coloured, whereas most modern breeds are white, at any rate in the main
fleece area. Apart from being unwanted in white garments, pigment inter¬
feres with dyeing, and so the desire to eliminate naturally-coloured wool
fibres from fleeces could have begun with the development of dyeing. The
mode of inheritance of colour in different breeds is likely to throw light on
their affinities and evolution.

2 Domestic sheep no longer moult; wild sheep moult their coat completely each
spring, and many primitive breeds show considerable fleece shedding, but the
more highly evolved breeds have almost lost the tendency to shed wool.
Fleece shedding can mean considerable loss of wool to the farmer, and so
man would wish to select against it, but a satisfactory means of obtaining the
wool would first have to be available in the form of iron sheep shears.

3 Hairiness has decreasedhairiness is undesirable because of the coarse fibre
diameter, the harsh “handle”, and the difficulty of dyeing hairy fibres.



      Early changes

The coat of the wild sheep consists of a relatively short hairy outer coat, and
an even shorter woolly undercoat, which is obscured by the outer coat1. The
496   Part IV Animals    RYDER


hairy fibres are about 6 cm. long, and are bristly in character, being known as
kemps (Fig. i). The main change in fleece structure since domestication can
therefore be regarded as a development of the wool at the expense of the kemp
(Fig. 2). The wool of sheep provides a paradox which leads to considerations
like that of Flannery2 on why it should have appeared. Wool was not a
product of domestication, yet it was insufficiently developed in the wild
animal to provide a reason for domestication.




  So far as I am aware, no sheepskin or wool from the neolithic period is
available for examination. Neolithic textiles usually turn out to be flax. One
assumes therefore that the coat of the first domestic sheep would have been
little different from that of the wild sheep before domestication. And, in fact,
some of the most primitive sheep in existence today, the so-called “hair”
sheep of tropical Africa and the hot plains of India, have a short kempy coat
with an undercoat of fine wool3. Although some of these breeds are brown, the
wild colour pattern has apparently been lost, and some are black and others
white. This type of coat has been interpreted as an adaptation to a hot environ¬
ment4, but the more likely explanation is that it has undergone little change
from that of the wild sheep although there is evidence of a reduction in the
undercoat in some. It may be that man lacked the stimulus to select for wool
to provide clothing in a hot environment.
   It is unlikely as suggested by Flannery5 that a woolly coat developed as a
result of natural selection towards a coat providing insulation in a hot environ-
                                          Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep               497




                                Fibre Diameter Measurements in /j
FINEWOOL (MERINO mean 22 5/u)   SH0RTW001 (fJORFOLK HORN mean 27-5 /j)   LONCWOOL(COTSWOLD mean 42 3/j)


Fig 2 Changes in fibre diameter distribution during fleece evolution. Measure¬
       ments from fleece of sheep remaining today have been given, but the last
       five distributions have been found in textiles of the Roman period.


ment. Wool is more likely to have been developed by man in a relatively cold
environment, the insulation of the sheep against heat being a purely secondary
and incidental feature of a fine-woolled fleece.
  White as well as black and piebald sheep are depicted in Ancient Egypt
before 2000 B.C., and the animals appear to have a short, kempy coat, although
the rams have a throat fringe like that found in wild rams6. The only wool
examined from this period was from a tomb of the “Old Kingdom”. This was
unspun, white, and had a length of 2 cm. which may not have been the full
498   Part IV Animals               RYDER




                                                                           a
                                                                           p
                     _ r—'                                    .q
                     ‘"3                     *3
                                                     •3
                                                      <u      T3
                                                                          'U
                                                                           <1>
                                                                                 •a
                                                                                  0
               S      <L>                    <L>
                                                      g
                                                               a>
                                                                           g      g
                      g
                      V-i                    g
                                             l-t               g
                                     <L>              E?             tr.fr        fr
                      d                       d                d
                      a>             P        <D      a        0      s §         S3
                      00             <3       bo               OX)   <3 43       43

                      <u                      <L>     <D       <L>                u
                     <J31                            <1                          <3
                                         ll                          gl           1
                     0
                     4-J
                                         •rj O       ■M
                                                      6        6
                                                              ■M
                                                                     .3   0       0
                                                                                 ■M
                                          & Y                        ^ V
               3     T3              4—1 § T>        TJ       T3     <u T3       TJ
                     <u               03 q d>         V        <u    P <L>        <D
                     £                O               £        £     q £          £
                     <D                   a ^         <L>
                     ^4             rPa P <u                   <L>   H <U        V
                                                              ^4     >.^4
                      03              C3     03      03        03    03 03       CO

                     00             VO               00       00     00 00



               I

                                                     o
                                    VO               O        VO     Tf          fO
                                    vb       00               6\     On 00       vb


               8?
                             00
                             Tf
                             VO
                             Tf                                                        50(1%)
                                       N
                             <N        m o  rt
                                                                                       62, 88 (2%)
                             Tf
                     <N rv          vp ^ 00 ^
                     m vo
                     I cr>
                     (N




                                             X       X        X      X X         X
                                     x       X       X        X      X X         X
                                     x       X       X        X      X X         X
              sf
                             D
                             M
                             <      u                                     u

                     ►. a
                             <L>
                                    PQ                                    «
               «                    O                                     o
                                    O                                     o
              Q     I s             VO
                    W PQ
                    ’S
                    &
                     C
                     <D                             M
                    rCJu                            u
                                                    o
                     CO
                     tj >»                          oT T3
              to                                    P S
                    II
                    <L>
                    4-J             V    .          co OX)
                    fi oP           Vh <u
                                    03              ' ►>! P
                                       o
                    £               X




               a
              co    •S u >S u
                    ° « o a
                    i cii d
                    « -g a .g

                    3 13 !
                    ^        g CO   g

                                                    w
                               Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep     499


                                                   ^3
                                                    g
                                                    I:
                                                    5T            VO
                                                                   I
                                                                   co
                                                                   m
                                                     &
                                                                   d
                                                    <0             d


                                                                  s
                                                                  <u
                                                      T3          Q
                                  TJ4>                73          si
                                                      as           .0

                                                       'd              Q
                                                                       D
                                                        d
                                                        oJ
                                                                   8
                                                       U           o
                                                                   o
                                                                   8
                                                                       O
a
g N N Tt-
dj O C4                                                            o
44                                                      o          O
                                                        X4
                                                        o
                                                        V-i
ro«^Mcnr-
                                                        ffl
£ N C4 rj h
             d
              6                     os
                                    >>                   d
              4)
             44                    4-J
                                                         <u        Xl
                                                         >
                                    d4>                  03
                                                         *-i       pd
                                                                       d
     d       +
                                    u                    bO
      a      d-                                          d
      4)     vo                    jg                                  <u
     44
             N
              1
                                   ■3                              X)<L)
     +       d-              CO     u           * -8
     VO      +         r- t                     0 £?
      <s               <S 10       J      <u     ; 44                  4>
       1 /              1 CO       T3    y         co                  X3
      CO
      M
                       00           C3    2
                                   "H W 1) >>    £s <£2
      X      X     X                C X! T3 >
      X      X     X                §.5fgS
     T3                             O To d d
      d          ■S                              S cd
      a           o     .          "d
     X)     u t2
     •d +-» 4) d
      o3 a b£)
                                    s            bo
                                                 TTH t-H               g
                                                  N <u
      4>                                                               o
     X4 ^« ^ 2c                                   <0 >
                                                 tQ       O            o
                                                  1                    £
                                                  S n
                                                    <L>
                       u                         CQ rZ
                                                 ^ <L>
                       PQ                         *> W>                 d
                       O                         »8 0                   o
                       o                         ^ co
                                                 w u
                       <N                                               03
                                                  o' 4>
                                                                        bfl
                                                  <0
                                                          d
                                                  £ tD                  4)
                                     a>           s
                                                  i-J                   >
                                    x3                   /*■—S
                                                                        d

                                                 O co
                                                     . ON              d-
                                                 y-'-N M
                                                  o ^                  vo
                                    x^                                  ON
                                     o3           d"
                                                  ON -4
                                                       .

                                     d
                                     4>
                                     3           So
                                     cr
                                     d>
                                     CO
                                                 T3 t£
                                     X)                      ay
                                         3       X -0
                                                 HH cO
                        bo
                       .a
                                                 •a s
                                                   o3
                                                                  a o
                                                  o               ftffi
                       44            ■S                           d 6
                        o3                        K               4>       O
                        co
                       *d
                                      3                           9PcH
                                                  jg «.§
                                                   o K d4)
                                                              p
                                                              b0 &.§f
                                                  WhUft
                        u
                        4> ,
                        >                          <3 -O
                       *S'
500   Part IV Animals      RYDER


length of the fleece7. The mean fibre diameter was 34'6/x and there was a
skewed-to-fine distribution, but there was a continuous range in fibre
diameter from 12 to 110^-x making it comparable with a hairy sheep (see below)
rather than a kempy sheep, which has a discontinuous diameter distribution
(see Mouflon in Fig. 2).
   Most of the major variations in sheep, i.e. in the horns, tail length, and the
appearance of a white, woolly type of fleece seem to have taken place by the
time that illustrations and records first appeared in Mesopotamia about 3000
b.c., i.e. during the first half of the period since domestication. This seems to
be an example of the principle that evolution along a new line at first proceeds
rapidly, and then slows down8. In addition, the fact that evolution progresses
more rapidly in smaller populations may have been a contributory factor.
  It is likely that those characters such as colour, and the absence of horns,
which seem to be controlled by relatively few genes, were introduced as a
result of mutations. But most characters of economic importance such as
fleece structure, and fleece weight are controlled by many genes, and show
continuous variation. Thus subsequent changes wrought by man can be
explained as due to a gradual selection of animals with the desired characters,
such as a woollier fleece. Once some divergence had taken place, human
migrations allowed wide out-breeding, and cross-breeding of this sort has
been an important factor in the development of modern breeds.



      Evidence from textile remains

The earliest wool, from textiles, that it has been possible to examine was from
the Bronze Age of northern Europe. The first workers who examined such
wool described it as mixed with deer hair. It is now realized that, at any rate in
most instances, the “deer hairs” are really the kemp fibres found in the fleeces
of primitive sheep. Details of the Bronze Age wool examined are given in
Table 1. The Danish Bronze Age wool from Guldhoj dated 1200 b.c., was
densely pigmented and had an unusual distribution of fibre diameters, which
was unlike any known fleece type9. This had a very high proportion of fine
fibres, and only a few medium and hairy fibres. That this was not a fortuitous
result is shown by the finding of the same unusual diameter distribution in
some Norwegian Bronze Age wool by Rosenqvist10.
  In primitive hand-spinning, the wool is taken direct from the staple, so one
expects the distribution of fibre diameter in the yam to be the same as that in
the fleece. This unexpected distribution was therefore puzzling until moulting
was investigated in the Soay sheep remaining on St. Kilda off north-west
Scotland. Although the fine wool, and some of the hairy fibres, shed in the
spring, many of the hairy fibres remain in the skin to shed later. Sheep that
moult are plucked to obtain their wool, and this retention of the hairy fibres
suggests that the plucking of primitive breeds might yield wool with a
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep    501


greater proportion of fine fibres than would be obtained if the fleece was shorn,
and the hairy fibres included.
   The similarity of sheep bones from excavations with those of the Soay11,
and the similarity of wool in textile remains with the fleece of the Soay12
suggest that the Soay type is a survivor of the prehistoric sheep of Europe.
   Soay fleeces range from a hairy type in which the hairy (outer coat) fibres
are fine kemps, to a woolly type in which the outer coat fibres are of only
medium diameter (Fig. 2). These probably correspond to the two types that
have been described in textile specimens as hairy medium, and generalized
medium, wool13. Irrespective of the extent of hairiness there are also dark and
light brown types of Soay14. Dark, hairy animals more closely resemble the
wild Mouflon, and are possibly the most primitive, while light, woolly
animals may be the least primitive. The coat length is comparable to that in
the Mouflon, being about 5 cm., and longer in hairy than woolly animals.
   This range of fleece type in a single population indicates that a similar
variation could have existed within flocks in the past. Thus the finding of
different fleece types in textiles from a particular site could indicate a range of
variation rather than the existence of distinct breeds.



      Evidence from skin

By the Iron Age in the West, and probably before in the Near East, much
wool was white, and a specimen from central Asia dated about 400 B.c.
comprised a complete sheepskin with the wool intact15. This came from a
Scythian burial at Pazirik in the Altai Mountains, and is of interest in having
an outer coat of hairs instead of the kemps or medium fibres found in the Soay
(PI. vi a and Table 2). So far only two types of fibre, kemp and wool, have
been mentioned, but some modern breeds have a third fibre type, long hairs.
These are also known as heterotype hairs because they are intermediate in
character between kemp and wool. They are coarse and kemp-like in summer,
but in winter hairs grow thinner, and appear like true wool fibres: when
kemps cease growing preparatory to shedding, hairs merely thin down and
continue to grow.
  The hairs of the Pazirik sample were longer and finer than kemps, but were
unusual in showing evidence of shedding in the skin. They may represent a
stage of evolution towards the much longer and usually continuously growing
heterotype hairs found in the fleeces of modern hairy hill sheep such as the
Scottish Blackface. Such fleeces have been thought of as being primitive, but
having this specialized type of hair fibre, they are apparently highly evolved.
  The origin of hairs would seem to be associated in some way with the
change from a moulting fleece to one of continuous growth. Whether man
began to select against moulting before or after starting to clip the wool is not
502   Part IV Animals   RYDER



                          8 s
                         4* £     *c3          cfl
                                  A           dJ

                                   <D
                                   a
                                  <a          £
                            3
                                 T3<D
                                              T3<D
                                 <D£          £<L>
                                   C/3        ■a
                                   o
                                  t>
                            o    <#            N
                                               (N
                                  N




                                                     o
                                         (N          O
                                       % OO          M
                           bo     6 I O I
                                  7 N op v£)
                        § ^        I
                                  (N
                                         VO
                                              O
                                               I     Qn

                                  m           <N
                        g*

                                              *
                                              6CJ
                                              m

                                              <u
                                              do
                          .fcb                d

                                              u
                                              PQ

                          a                   O
                                              o
                          Q                vn
                                 43 w    m oX




                                 <
                                 73u
                          co      d           d
                                  D           <                   Jh
                                 U                              Oj
                                                                w
                                  N           73                  o
                                  Oj
                                 Ph           SC
                                                                  a
                                              OJ                  <u
                                              d
                                              d
                                              <L>
                                                                 <u
                                                                 Sh
                                              >                  2
                                                                 oo
                                               s                 aJ
                                                                 <D
                                   So         gcn
                           sto
                                  o<D          d                <U
                          Co
                                   ctf        s                 £
                                 dj
                                              E?
                                              O                 K
                                                          X
                                                          <l>
                                                                ****»
                                                                •<5
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep   503


known, but it is thought that shears were invented in the Near East about
1000 B.C.

   In order to investigate the possibility that heterotypes had originated by
crossing a woolly with a kempy sheep, some Merino sheep were crossed with a
Mouflon, but the offspring had kemp and wool like the Mouflon parent16.
   The Pazirik specimen introduces the skin as a new source of evidence, and
fibre length as a new dimension. Textile specimens, although readily studied,
provide only fibre diameter values; it would be virtually impossible to obtain
measurements of fibre length from them. The wool fibres on the Pazirik skin
were 8 cm. long, and the hairs extended to 12 cm. That this was the maximum
length was shown by observing in sections of the skin that the fibres had
“brush ends” i.e. they had ceased to grow. This length of coat is longer than
that of the wild sheep, or the Soay, but is comparable with only the shortest
hairy fleeces of today. A sheepskin from the Iron Age Hallstatt salt workings
in Austria had brush ends in the skin, but the length of 3 cm. seems too short
to be the maximum coat length, and so this had probably become shortened
through fibre breakage. The coarse fibres of this specimen appeared to be
kemps rather than hairs (Table 2). The way in which fibre length can alter the
appearance and nature of the coat was shown with some goats by Ryder17.
Most goats have a short woolly undercoat obscured by a kempy outercoat,
and when such animals were crossed with an Angora goat (the source of
mohair) the progeny grew long wool, like that of the Angora parent, which
completely obscured the kemp.
  But if remains of woolled sheepskins are rare, remains of skin in the form
of leather and parchment are not, and these frequently contain fibre remains
that can not only provide measurements of fibre diameter, but give different
evidence from the way in which they are arranged in the skin18.
  The outer coat hairs are formed first in the foetus, and are known as
primary fibres. The fibres of the underwool are formed later and are known as
secondaries. In most mammals the fibres are not distributed at random in the
skin, but are arranged in characteristic groups. Primary fibres he in rows of
three, and the smaller but more numerous secondaries are grouped on one
side of them so that each fibre group, which is the smallest unit of the
coat, consists of a trio of outer coat primaries with their associated finer
secondaries.
  In the wild sheep (Fig. 3a) there is a tendency for the secondary fibres to lie
between the primaries. The kempy sheep of the tropics, and the goat, have a
similar grouping, but the secondaries have begun to move from between the
primaries. The remaining three groups in Fig. 3 were found in parchment
from the Dead Sea Scrolls19. The group shown in Fig. 3b is from a hairy sheep
comparable with the Pazirik animal, but only a few were of this type. Most
had a grouping like that in 3 c which corresponds to the generalized medium
wool type found in the Soay, but the Dead Sea samples had no pigment.
504   Part IV Animals      RYDER


                                            o
                                                                  o
                                          o°-                     o 0
                                          oo
                                           o                      ao J00 o
                                         o                                 o
                                                                    o        o °o
                                                                o     c °o O
                                                                 a o
                                                                           o O oO
                                                                       o 0  00
                                             O O                         9 <*
                                                                       ■'O

                                                                         %
                                                                    '.V-'     ° s* O
                                             o                      oo° O0 ®
                                                                 o     o o o o9 O
                                              o
                                               o                            O aaO
                                                O
                                                               OO
                                          *1.                  °o      0

Fig 3 Wool fibre groupings in the skin (a) in wild sheep, (b), (c), (d) in parch¬
      ment from the Dead Sea Scrolls; (b) hairy sheep; (c) generalized
      medium wool; (d) fine-woolled sheep.
      (from Ryder, M. L. (1962). The histological examination of skin in the study
      of the domestication of sheep, Z. Tierziicht. ZuchtBiol., 77, pp. 168-71.)


There were two specimens of true fine-woolled type (3d) which is interesting
because it showed that a possible ancestor of the modem fine-woolled Merino
breed was in existence in the Near East about 2000 years ago.
  The evolutionary trend in the wool fibre groups of domestic sheep therefore
seems to have been a movement of the secondaries from between the
primaries, accompanied by a tendency for the primary fibres to become less
hairy, and then finer. As more secondaries have developed in finer-woolled
types, these have spread away from the primaries. Thus fleece type can be
inferred from the type of fibre grouping in the skin from the relative sizes of
the primary and secondary fibres, and from the relative number of secondary
fibres in the group, i.e. the S/P ratio20. There is too little evidence as yet to
enable one to associate these changes with distinct areas of the Near East and
particular dates as attempted by Flannery21.



      The generalized medium wool (ancient fine wool) as
      an evolutionary link

Some samples of leather from water skins found in the Cave of the Letters
near the Dead Sea by Yadin22 and dated second century a.d. gave results
similar to those from the Dead Sea Scrolls, viz. they were predominantly from
a generalized medium wool sheep23. But some pieces of dyed cloth with the
leather were of immense interest because to the naked eye they were appar¬
ently made of fine wool. This wool would therefore seem to be the ancient
fine wool to which classical writers refer. A microscopic examination gave a
different result, however, which made all the earlier findings fall into place
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep    505


Under the microscope, in addition to the fine fibres, there was seen to be a
proportion amounting to about 15% which were of medium diameter (Fig. 4).
 This wool, which was white, therefore corresponded to the generalized
medium type (Fig. 3c) which predominated in the parchment from the Dead
Sea Scrolls, and was not a true fine type (Fig. 3d) as suspected from the
examination by naked eye.




Fig 4 Distribution of fibre diameters in unspun wool from cave near Dead Sea
      dated second century a.d.
      (from Ryder, M. L. (1964). Fleece evolution in domestic sheep, Nature, Lojid.
      204, pp. 555-9-)


  This type has apparently been important in fleece evolution. The name
“generalized medium wool” derives from the fact that the fleece appears to be
in an intermediate position, providing a probable evolutionary link between
more primitive kempy or hairy types, and several of the more highly evolved
fleeces of today.
   It could have evolved from a more primitive type by a narrowing of kemps
or hairs to produce medium fibres. The generalized medium type could in
turn have given rise to the true fine wool by a further narrowing of the
medium fibres so that the fleece contained only fine fibres (Figs. 2 and 5).
And in fact, as mentioned above, a few parchments from the Dead Sea
Scrolls show that this had already taken place, at least in some sheep, about
2000 years ago.
506        Part IV Animals     RYDER


   If on the other hand selective breeding had caused the finer fibres to
become coarser, then a diameter distribution comparable with that of
the modern longwool would have been obtained. Thirdly, if the range of
fibre diameter had become shortened to give a more symmetrical distribu¬
tion, with a mean diameter between the fine and medium values, the distri¬
bution would be comparable with that of the modern shortwool (Figs. 2 and
5). The existence of this generalized type as a possible common ancestor of
the longwool on the one hand, and the shortwool on the other, makes it un¬
likely that the shortwool was derived from the longwool as was suggested on
biological grounds by Fraser and Hamada24 or that the longwool was derived
from the shortwool as suggested from historical evidence by Bowden25.
   Some samples of the Roman period from Murrabaat near the Dead Sea,
and others of a similar date from Daliyeh, ten miles north of Jericho, supplied
by Miss E. M. Crowfoot confirmed the above findings28. The measurements
have been detailed in Tables 3 and 4 to show the range of variation. Of the
twenty-four yarns from Murrabaat, nine were typical of the generalized



  No.        Range              Mean   Mode    Distribution      Fleece Type

40(b)         8-30               20     18    symmetrical      true fine
41 (b)       12-34               19     18    skew-fine        true fine
40(a)        12-36               21     16    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
41 (a)       10-34               23     22    symmetrical      fine/gen. medium
               1 of 40
43 c (b)     10-38               20     18    symmetrical      true fine
42b (b)      12-40               22     l6    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
45 (b)       12-40               22     18    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
48 (a)       12-40               22     20    skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
48 (b)       10-40               21    17     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
43d (b)       8-42               20    20     symmetrical      true fine
47a (b)      12-42               23    20     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
62 (b)       12-42               21    18     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
50b (b)      10-44               22    18     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
62 (a)       10-44               22    18     skew-fine        fine/gen. medium
                1 of 48
42b (a)      10-46               24    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
43c (a)      12-46               21    16     skew-fine        gen. medium
43 d (a)     10-46               23    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
                I of 52
42a (b)      10-48               22    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
47a (a)      14-48               22    18     skew-fine        gen. medium
                50 & 52
50b (a)      12-50 (slight      24     20     skew-fine        gen. medium
               pigmentation)
44f (a)       8-50               28    22     symmetrical      gen. med./medium
               2 of 54
45 (a)       10-52               23    20     skew-fine        gen. medium
44f(b)       10-52               25    16     skew-fine        gen. medium
                1 of 56
42a (a)      10-54               25     18    skew-fine        gen. medium


Table 3 Wool fibre diameter measurements in          yarns    from   Murrabaat
     (microns).
                               Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep       507


medium wool, but one medium sample had a symmetrical distribution and so
could represent the evolution towards the true medium type proposed above.
Four yarns were of true fine type, and ten, although having a skewed-to\fine
distribution like the generalized medium wool, were finer and perhaps inter¬
mediate between the generalized medium and fine types. It is possible,
however, that these were generalized medium wools that had become finer
owing to poor nutrition.



  No.          Range        Mean      Mode      Distribution       Fleece Type

No. 4         10-24          16        16      symmetrical      true fine
A. (b)        10-26          17        16      symmetrical      true fine
C. (a)        10-36          19        16      symmetrical      true fine
18(d)         12-32          19        l6      symmetrical      true fine
No. 6         12-32          21        20      symmetrical      true fine
D. (b)        12-34          22        22      symmetrical      true fine
No. 2         12-36          24        22      symmetrical      true fine
A. (a)        10-32          22        20      symmetrical      true fine
                1 of 40
B. (b)        14-34          21        20      skew fine        fine/gen. medium
                3 of 40
II (2) (b)    12-46          23        20      skew fine        gen. medium
D. (a)        14-48          25        20      skew fine        gen. medium
B. (a)        14-46          27        24      skew fine        gen. medium
                3 of 50
II (1) (a)    10-42          23        20      skew fine        gen. medium
                2 of 52
II (2) (a)    12-42          21        l6      skew fine        gen. medium
                I of 54
18            12-40          24        22      skew fine        gen. medium
                56 & 58
II (1) (b)    12-48          21        16      skew fine        hairy medium
                54 & 80
C.(b)         12-46          27      22 & 28   symmetrical      gen. med./medium
                1 of 50
Z weft        14-50          33        30      symmetrical      shortwool
tent (b)      12-140         36        20      continuous       hairy



Table 4 Wool fibre diameter measurements in yams from Daliyeh (microns).


     In contrast, eight of the yams from Daliyeh were of true fine type, and
only one was a fine generalized medium wool. If, as is suggested, some of the
fine yarns (Nos. 2, 4 and 6) in fact date back to the fourth century b.c., then
the origin of the true fine wool can be pushed back several centuries. Five of
the Daliyeh yarns were generalized medium wool, and one was of the hairy
medium type, which is more common on sites in northern Europe. There was
again one possible true medium type, and also one shortwool. These types are
somewhat unexpected in this region because they became predominant later
in Britain, but there is no reason why they should not have evolved in¬
dependently in other areas. Finally, one yarn from a tent was of hairy type
(the other tent yams being camel hair). This suggested that three samples of
508   Part IV Animals                             ryder



                                                       E
                                                       3
                                                                                        6
                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                a3 a3 a3 a3
                                                                                       *3                                  *3 y. *8             X3 X) T3 T3
         3                                      §11                                     <u                                 <U 2h d>             <L>   d>    d>    <L>
                        •2 ^ i
                        "O XJ *ri
                         K U XI        XJ       I fi                                    6• 3<L)|!
                                                                                               X3 X3
                                                                                                                           a a e                a a a a
                      • J <L>
                               E S
                                       d>                                              G d d> <L>          ri g c                               cede
                    6 6                E                                               (U G E G
                                                                                       bfl^c C
                                                                                                           <3 Si <u
                                                                                                           M •J® t>o
                                                                                                                                                d>    d>
                                                                                                                                                be be be be
                                                                                                                                                            d>    <U

                    >, >>
                 <u . E J> <u u <L> d) G w                                             <lT .E c   <L> <L> <u     dT                              d> d> dT
                 G *C0 c3      C3      v G                                             fl cd o             G
                <G X! rG      rG 5        4h                                           2 »G W) bo         cG                                    «§ «S
                 d>     d>    d>
           e     G G
           o
         ■ •—
                <G <G
          3      o o CJ
                    +-•              H ’G        d>    d) ’C! w d>                     d)    d)     d>     d>   d           J   d)   d)   ‘C    d>    d>    d)
         -o
         ’C
                  i  1  1           ■M *-*
                                                       d
                                                           4—<             G            G                                                        G          G
                T3 XJ Gd
                 d> d) d)
                                     d> d»
                                                «§
                                                           dl
                                                               !<§ cG                  cG                       OJ                        d)
                                                                                                                                                «G    cS cG
                 d>     d>    d)
                                    s     g
                                          G   &
                                              d> d)              !   d>    d>           d>    <D  d) o
                                                                                                      &         g           i   & & 5
                                                                                                                            J d> d>          OJ d>
                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                                   OJ
                ZZ                        pA zz ZZ                                           ZZ zz ZZ           tn          4 zz zz       >3^4 Z4 Z4
                        C/3   00    C/D   C/3 C/3          (Z1       C/3   C/3         C/3    C/D C/D C/D       C/3         0 C/3 C/D     C/D   C/3         C/D


                00            O     o vo        G- G 00              O     N           00    o <N o O                       d o o               00 VO O
                                                                                                                                                 ►-4 M M
          o             HH    <S    m           H-4 H4 i             (N    •“4          ►H   (N     (S          (S          S   (S   (S




          R
          G     vO      N nq m r- n 00 oo m                                                  r*^ vo   oq o\ fO ON G*                            G vq rn
          d>
         V-<    6       M m OO VO  CO     6 d-                                         <N    o »/q <N on 6 (N (N 6                              On 00       ON rn
                (S      (S <N (S M M l>
                                      M M (S                                           <N    <N            fS   M     (S   <N   (N   (S             M          (N

                                                                                              O
                                                                                             vo
          d)                                                                                 T3
          §P            o n                                  .
                                                                                              G
                                                                                              CS
          Q             i> o                     o          q.                                (N
                         C/D 00                 00
                                                            O                    d-           oq
                        .*3 tu                   (-4        d"
          ?»-                                                                                 C/3
                         2 "G                   •1         4-4
          <N>           GJ ^                                                                 .G
          *«»                                   »G          O                    VO           G
                   N w                      ro   MrC        M
          Q      o G VO o O VO     (N VO rs 4-* O o       G* N N O G" 00                                                                        VO 00 oo          O
                m m rn vq m m m nq vq oq
                                            03
                                                d* -1- G- G* m m G- G- m                                                                        m m rtq G-
                                    I 1
                vo A <n (S i A N1 00 00 vo1                      1
         q       l       I                  HH                         l                                                                             1 1
                                                A A A 4 A A G- 4 N                                                                              A A <N (S



                                                                                        X X X X                            XXX                  X
                    I    | X X I                       x X X                            X X X X I                     I    I I I                I            I     I
                 ca jd rtjo                                                                                                          :(         3 « 3 a
                                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                       Co            (2)
                                                           O                                                               vo                         i/q
                                                                                                                <N          N        m                m           o

                                                           m                           4-i
                                                                                       G3  c3                   6          o         o                o
                                                                                                                                                                  z
                                                           6
                                                                                        03 S
                                                                                           3                    z          z         z                z           o
                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                           <                           4-* +-»




                                                                                 rC
                                                                                  *J
                §                                                                 o
                                                T3                               T>                 ;>>         ^
                §
                cj _ 'S<u                                                         <D
         &0                               ^  §                                    G c
                                          Jh ^
                                          2 o
                                                           Z4                     G d>
                111
                « « w
                                                           l-l
                                                           o                      S G               <u          rG
                                          i COu                            C?          c*                       u
                m             Z           Gh               f*
                                                                           1|*
                                                                                                    O           CO
                              O
                              00

                                          "3-                              1>2
                              <           <                                W
                                                                           v-^' &
                <                         Pd                               C/3   fl
                P-4                                        £               a  s
                              go          ♦-J                              X) >>
                                                                           03 OJ
                                                                                                                N
                 o
                 u            u           o
                                           o               G               5s                                   c
                CO            CO          CO               G                                                    ‘G
          3§                  a3          a3               £               CO
         Co     uC/3
                                          <u
                                          c/D
                 G                        G                2
                S                         S                §
                3                                          Ph*
                 G                        S3
                .O            w           ,VJ OJ
                *->03         4-»
                              03          '<j
                                           03 G>,
                                                                                                    <u
                                                                                                    XJ
                                                                                                    ^3
                z             Z           Z PC                                                                  Q
                                                        Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep                                       509




fine/gen. medium




fine                   fine
                                                               g
                                                                     CO    CO    CO
                                                               MX! X! X


skew fine                                                                                                                    VO
                                                                                                                              I


                       skew fine/
                                      <U (U              u u <u <u <u
                                      G G
skew fine/                            X X                gcgcgcgcg                                                           N
                                      Si<U £  £          a & £ & £                                                           a
symmetrical
                                                         P<3J<U<U<U
                                           <U_
                                    >>44 44 44
                                                 <L>
                                                         ^44 44 44 44                                                        a
                                                         C/3   C/3   C/3   C/D   C/3
                                                                                                                             to
20                                                                                                                           VO
20                      18            00     o
                                      m (N N N   O       00
                                                          <N
                                                               o
                                                               (S
                                                                     00
                                                                     h
                                                                           o
                                                                           (S
                                                                                 N
                                                                                 (N



                                                                                               C/3   00    c/D   co
                                                                                               G G         G C
                                                                                               O O
                                                                                                 »-< O O
                                                                                                 o
207                                                                                            '§ 6 G G
                       212
                                             VP Ov       \0 h romh
                                                                                                           VO N               o
                                                                                                            ►h r)
                                      ov Tt- ^ vp         r-vo G- r- ^ tj-vo
20 4                                  M(S(N(S             (SN(S(N<Nc/3N»h
                                                                                                                             GQ
                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                             <u
                                                 o                                                   4-J


12-30 plus I of 44
                                                                     3.                              cd
                                                                    00   3.                          <u
                                                          3.     3. vp vO
                                                                         O       C/3                 H
                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                 C/3    .X
                                                          0      O C/3           G                               G
                                                         VO     VO _J-< u        O                   O           O
                                                 CO      J-t     u e3 cd         lx
                                                                                 (j
                                                                                                     CO          Ih
                                                                                                                 U     >0  3
                                                                                                                       v-> CO
                                           j3            *cd     cd 43  43
                                           'a            43     43 <N M G 6
                                                                            'cd                      0
                                                                                                     G           G     ^ C


14-34
                                       N O VO O           <N VO N VO 0-1               cr                              d_&
                       14-36
                                                                                 0                   <u
                                       m t}- op vp        VP Tt VP Tt- VP CO MD                      00          N     ao
                                                                      1  1                                              r> J-H
                                       (S N N O           M M    O <N Tf        VO
                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                 i<s       CJ4
                                                                         M             5             2~-
                                                                                                                       M ‘3
                                                                                                                        . X
                                                                                                                       §h
                                                                                                                       p-c
                        -               I    I   X X      X     X    X     X     X                                     7 £
  (b) -                                                                                43 ^                W
                                      ^ S' ^ S'                                                                        5N
                        weft
                                                          o     03    m    ojG

warp -                                                                                 id      g
                                                                                       O       g                       a1"1
                                                                                       43                              <U
                                                                                       +-> t3                          <u
                                                                                                                       43           <u
                                                                                       2 G
                                                                                       M (N                                         G
                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                        G                                          PC
                                                                                        <u
                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                       o O „
                                                  VP           vO
                                                                                                                       X > T3
                                                                                                                              ^ G
                                                  t—t                <W                                                       <u N
                                                  I                                                                          43 w


           (Germany)
                                                                 I    W     M
                                                  r-            t- | 1
                                       sG         l              l <S N
                                                                      M     M                                                       5
                                                  0             Add
                                                                 vp vp                                                             £
                                      0           On            Ov On Ov
                                                                                                                       V.     0
                                                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                                       ?-> CL .

                                                                                                                       33    (2 J
                                       00
                                       H                           G G
                                                                                       “o
                                       G          N             N O O                  4cd-J
                                                                                        C/3                              •    VP    vu
                                                                                                                                   ^3
                                                                     ”25 3
           Mainz
                                      43         .s            .S
                                                                     T
                                                                      fH
                                                                      Ul                0
                                                                                                                       rj-VO
                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                       vVO fx'
                                                                                                                            n        #
                                                                cd
                                       Id
                                        cd
                                                 *cd                  O                43                              S'-^'o
                                       C/D       S                   hJ                 H                              W . vp
                                                                                        s
                                                                                       <u
                                                                                       z
                                                                                       4x
                                                  G                                     0
                                                   G                                    00                              u u
                                                  <U
                                                  C/3                                   c                               <u o G
                                                   G                                   "G                              •G *d o>
                                                                                         <u
                                                 2                                       >                             PC pc P
                                                                                         o
                                                                                         o                             —n         s s~s
                                                                                                                        <3 -O VJ
                                                 *c                                    3
                                                 m                                     3J
5io   Part IV Animals    RYDER


leather which were from hairy animals were in fact from hairy sheep and not
from goats.
   The generalized medium wool is probably the same as the fine-woolled
sheep referred to in Roman records, which apparently originated in the Near
East, and spread around the Mediterranean27. It may have been brought to
northern Europe by the Romans.
  Table 5 summarizes the findings from European textiles of the Roman
period, and these in general accord with the results from the Near East
(above). Of thirty yarns examined five were of true fine type, and eleven were
fine generalized medium wools. There were only four typical generalized
medium wools, but seven of hairy medium type. Again evolution towards the
true medium (two yams) and the shortwool (one yarn) had occurred.
  The remainder of the first millennium a.d. is represented in the Mediter¬
ranean region by Coptic and other textiles from North Africa. Although these
were of the same general type as the earlier wools from the Near East, they
were appreciably hairier, and some yarns from Tripoli dated about A.D. 1000
had natural pigmentation like wools of similar date from northern Europe.
The measurements are summarized in Table 6 from which it can be seen that
there was only one relatively fine type, and seven generalized medium wools,
but there were seven of hairy medium type and two hairy ones.
  Wools of similar date from northern Europe similarly had more hairy
representatives, and even more pigment than during the Roman period
(Table 7). There were fifteen hairy medium wools, ten generalized medium
wools and one of true medium type. There were only three intermediate fine
wools, but as many as nine of true fine type, which came mainly from English
Saxon sites.
  The mediaeval period in North Africa is represented by twenty-four yarns
from Nubia supplied by Miss E. Crowfoot. These came from burials at
Qasr Ibrim dated tenth to fourteenth century, excavated by Prof. J.
Plumley.
  The generalized medium type predominated with nine examples and there
were six of hairy medium type. Two more hairy specimens had a mean
diameter and distribution more in keeping with the true hairy type. There
were two yams comparable with the shortwool of northern Europe, and two
of fine to generalized medium type, but only three true fine wools. Only three
specimens, three hairy medium wools and one fine to generalized medium
wool, had natural pigmentation (Table 6a).



      British breeds of sheep

The main type of sheep in Britain before the Roman occupation was probably
brown and of Soay type. Historical evidence suggests that the Romans
introduced a white sheep with a finer fleece. Textile evidence summarized
                                     Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep   511


above supports this conclusion, and suggests that the sheep was basically of
generalized medium type.
     It is possible that crosses between the white, Roman sheep, and the brown,
native Soay produced types that later emerged as breeds such as the Cheviot
of the Scottish Border, and the Welsh Mountain breed. These are (or were)
horned in the males only, any pigment is usually brown, and they remain
today in the northern and western parts of Britain which received least
Roman influence (Fig. 5).
     The Roman generalized medium type could itself have evolved into a
primitive longwool, by the coarsening of the fine fibres, already discussed.


Source           Range                Mean      Mode    Distribution     Fleece Type

Coptic wools in the British Museum
T13 (b)          8-44                   20       20    symmetrical/    fine/gen.
                                                         skew fine        medium
Tio (a)         8-46                    21        14   skew fine       gen. medium
T9 (b)          10-46                   21     16 & 20 skew fine       gen. medium
T8 (b)          8-40                    22        20   skew fine       gen. medium
                  2 of 50, 56
T8              10-30                   19       l6    skew fine       gen. medium
                  2 of 44, 56
Tio (b)         8-42                    22       20    skew fine       hairy medium
                  50,60
T9 (a)          10-44                   22       14    skew fine       hairy medium
                  50, 60
T8 (a)          10-44                   27       20    skew fine        hairy medium
                  3 of 50, 2 of 60
T12 (b)         16-52                   31       20    skew fine        hairy medium
                  2 of 60 & 68, 72
T13 (a)         10-52                   26       20    skew fine       hairy medium
                   58
T12 (a)         10-60                   32       30    continuous      hairy
                  64 & 76

Coptic wools in Halifax Museum
E9-33i           12-54                  25       20    skew fine       gen. medium
                   58
Ec>-329          14-16                  25       22    skew fine       gen. medium
                  50


Ghirza, Tripoli, A.D. 1000
GH41
natural brown
warp            i4-5°                   26       22    skew fine       hairy medium
                56, 60
yellow weft     12-54                   26       24    skew fine       gen. medium
GH45
natural brown
warp          20—64                     37       26    skew fine       hairy medium
GH55
pigmented xxx 8-50
                2 of 58, 60,76          26       22    skew fine       hairy



Table 6 Diameter measurements of North African wools of the first
         millennium A.D. (microns).
512     Part IV Animals        RYDER


The appropriate diameter range has been found in at least one textile from
Britain, and the white-faced, polled, Romney breed, whose original home was
Kent, is an example of a primitive longwool.
 A shortening of the diameter range probably produced the shortwool of
English mediaeval fame, and most mediaeval illustrations show white-faced
polled sheep like that surviving today as the Ryeland breed. Surprisingly,
Romano-British textiles include the true fine type rather than this shortwool,
i.e. the type that would be derived by a shortening of the diameter range28.
The true fine wool, which could have been derived by a narrowing of the
medium fibres emerged in Spain as the modern Merino breed (Fig. 5).
     The third main British sheep is the black-faced horned type. This has a
long hairy fleece, and first appeared in northern and eastern England29. When
it arrived is not known, but it appears to have had an ultimately Asiatic origin,


No.          Pigment   Range              Mean   Mode   Distribution      Fleece Type

36/1 (a)     —          8-24              l6        14   symmetrical   fine
     (b)                8-24              16     14 & 18 symmetrical   fine
                         2 at 30
21b          -         14-34              22       16   skew fine      fine
15c          -         14-38              23       l6   skew fine      fine/gen. medium
15a          XXX       14-36              22       16   skew fine      fine/gen. medium
                         42
2            -         14-40              23       26   skew fine      gen. medium
21a                    16-38              26       27   skew fine      gen. medium
                         50
44                     16-42              28       24   skew fine      gen. medium
             "
                         46
21c                    16-42              28       24   skew fine      gen. medium
             "
                         48
29c          -         14-48              27      24    skew fine      gen. medium
4a           -         16-48              29      24    skew fine      gen. medium
4b           -         14-52              26      20    skew fine      gen. medium
28b          -         14-52              27      18    skew fine      gen. medium
29a          -         14-54              58      20    skew fine      gen. medium
9a           -         14-44              25      24    symmetrical    shortwool
46           -         18-44              27      26    symmetrical    shortwool
18b          XXX       14-66              27      20    skew fine      hairy medium
9b                     16-48              26      24    skew fine      hairy medium
             "
                         60& 86
28a                    16-48              32      28    skew fine      hairy medium
                         60, 62, 66, 68
15b          XXX       16-54              29      20    skew fine      hairy medium
                         76
29d          X         16-52              31            skew fine      hairy medium
                                                  24
                         74
18a                    16-58              30      22    skew fine      hairy medium
                         94
28a                    18-48              32      30    symmetrical    hairy medium/
                         54, 56, 82                                      hairy
29b                    10-64              36      30    symmetrical    hairy medium/
                                                                         hairy


Table 6a Diameter measurements of mediaeval wools from Qasr                       Ibrim
     Nubia (microns).
NEW STONE AGE                                                                             ‘TURBARY*
                                                                                  (only skeletal evidence so far)


                  WO   o
                       O    CQ   o




                  LU
      (U   c*     N         O    LU
                < o <
                   o Z
                            o U4
                               o
                zo   §      *0




                                 O



     LU         04
v>   o     z    3      >*   <    Q
                H




                t
                (W
     iu    $    LU
                </>        I
                                      Fig 5 Suggested lines of evolution of fleece types. The dates given are approximate ones based on the
                                           earliest date for the beginning of each period at the centre of domestication in South-west
                                           Asia, although for instance the Bronze Age fleece evidence comes entirely from Northern
                                           Europe at a later date.
 514          Part IV Animals      RYDER




Source           Pigment   Range           Mean   Mode Distribution    Fleece Type

Germany
Steinfeld
T43 (a)            XX      12-30           166     l6   skew fine     gen. medium
                             I of 50
        (b)        XX      10-34           17-1    l6   skew fine     gen. medium
                             40&48
Schleswig
T33 (a)           XX       14-54           290     30   symmetrical   medium
     (b)          XX       12-30           229     22   skew fine     hairy medium
                             2 of 58, 66
Schleswig
T34 (a)           xxx      14-78           297     22   skew fine     hairy medium
    (b)           xxx      16-48           286     30   symmetrical   hairy medium
                             68, 70, 78
Schleswig
T35 (a)           xxx      14-36           25-0    20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             46, 64 & 76
    (b)           xxx      16-48           285     22   skew fine     gen. medium
Schleswig
T36 (a)           X        14-38           225     20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             i at 60
        (b)       X        14-34           224     20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             some hairs
        (c)       XX       16-44           262     20   skew fine     gen. medium
        (d)       XX       14-46           262     26   symmetrical   shortwool
        (e)       xxx      18-42           285     20   skew fine     hairy medium
                             54, 58, 64
Netherland varves
T37 (a)       XX           14-58           290     24   skew fine     hairy medium
Groningen                    62,76, 80
    (b)       XXX          14-52           257     26   symmetrical   hairy medium
Ezinge                       66 & 80
T38 (a)       XX           10-26           181     20   symmetrical   fine
    (b)       XX            8-34           186     18   symmetrical   fine
Leens
T39 (a)       xxx          14-62           334    22    skew fine     hairy medium
    (b)      xxx           12-46           24 6   20    skew fine     hairy medium
                             52, 54) 76
Leens
T40 (a)           xxx      12-58           277    22    skew fine     hairy medium
                             1 of 64
        (b)       xxx      12-52           266    20    skew fine     hairy medium
                              1 of 70
Leens
T41 (a)           xxx      14-44           217     18   skew fine     gen. medium
                             50&56
        (b)       xxx      14-58           24-1    18   skew fine     hairy medium
                             64, 66, 78
Norway (Saetrang)
P20 skin     xxx           10-42           214    20    skew fine     gen. medium
      hair   xxx           12-50           27-1   20    skew fine     gen. medium
England (Saxon sites)
Combe, Kent
1 (a)                      12-44           21      16   skew fine     gen. medium
                             50-56
  (b)             -
                            8-44           21      18   skew fine     gen. medium
2 (a)             XX        8-44           22      16   skew fine     hairy medium
                             64
  CM              XX       10-46           22      16   skew fine     gen. medium
                                 Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep     515

Table 7 (cont.)



Source       Pigment   Range          Mean    Mode Distribution    Fleece Type


Broomfield Barrow
Bi (a)       XX        10-34           20      18   symmetrical   fine
   (b)       XX        12-34           22      22   symmetrical   fine
                         44
B3 (a)            XX    8-38           18      14   skew fine     fine/gen. medium
                         44
   (b)            —
                       10-28           18      18   symmetrical   fine
B4 pile           -    10-32           17      16   symmetrical   fine
Sutton Hoo
SHi (a)           _     8-38                   10   skew fine     fine
                                       15
     (b)          -     8-32           l6      13   skew fine     fine
SH2 (a)           -     8-36           17      16   skew fine     fine/gen. medium
                         40,42
   (b)            _    10-38           18      18   skew fine     fine
SH10 pile         ~    10-40           20      20   skew fine     fine/gen. medium



Table 7 Diameter measurements of northern European wools dating from
     A.D. 300 to 900 (microns).



possibly going back to the Pazirik sheep already discussed, and there are
similar breeds on the continent, notably the Heidsnucke of Germany30.
   The relative fineness of Saxon wools has already been mentioned. Although
mediaeval wools examined from Scotland were fine, earlier (Viking) and later
wools from Scotland tended to be hairy31. It has been possible to examine
surprisingly few mediaeval wools, and with progressively later date one is less
certain of local manufacture. Nahlik32 studied many textiles from Novgorod
in Russia dating from the tenth to the fifteenth centuries, and one can see
from his figures that all types from true fine to very coarse fleeces are repre¬
sented, but he acknowledges the difficulty of deciding which were local cloths,
and which were imported.
  Evidence from various sources allows the following tentative suggestions to
be made regarding the fleece types of European sheep. The first wave of
sheep to spread through Europe were probably of Soay type, and in addition
to the Soay itself remaining on the very edge of the continent its influence
apparently remains in the Scandinavian “northern short-tailed” breeds (in¬
cluding the Orkney and Shetland sheep in Britain) which have a range of
colours (black, grey and white) with relatively few brown animals33. The
Roman fine-woolled sheep was apparently a big influence in western Europe,
and the black-faced, hairy, Asiatic type is another main type, but with which
Asiatic invasion it entered Europe is as yet unknown. Investigation of more
material, particularly from south-eastern Europe, may help to fill-in the
details of this sketchy framework.
  The three main biological problems in fleece evolution that remain to be
solved are, first, what changes took place dining the several thousand years
516   Part IV Animals     rydek


between domestication and the earliest (Bronze Age) wool samples examined ?
Neolithic samples are needed to investigate this question.
  Second, how did the long, continuously-growing heterotype hair originate ?
The occurrence of a hairy fleece (the N-type) in the New Zealand Romney
provides a similar problem, but this has usually been thought of as a “throw¬
back” rather than a new mutation34. Further Asiatic samples of similar date to
the Pazirik skin may provide a range of types that might help to elucidate this
change.
  Thirdly, what was the origin of the long, lustrous, coarse but non-medul-
lated fibres of the longwool ? The diameter changes that seem to lead towards
the lustrous longwool fleece, which apparently emerged in its present form in
England in the seventeenth century, have been discussed in the present
account, but the type of specimen available precludes length measurements.
A mutation may well have been important in this change, a similar mutation
having been described in the Merino breed35.



      The coat of cattle

The coat of cattle presents a more difficult problem than that of sheep be¬
cause wild cattle are now extinct, and far less is known about variation in the
coat of modern cattle than in the fleeces of sheep. In addition, the relative
wealth of material from wool textiles is lacking, the main source of material
being leather, and this has fewer hair remains even than parchment. It is clear,
however, that the variation is less in cattle, presumably because the coat has
undergone little or no selection.
  All the hairs of cattle are in fact comparable with the primary fibres of
sheep, and they are distributed at random in the skin, and not in groups as in
sheep. Roman and mediaeval leather examined indicated a coat similar to that
of modern cattle. Where hairs remained, the density of pigment granules
could be discerned, but not the actual colour. Those examined had little
pigmentation (at least in the area from which the skin had come) being
either grey or dun.
  The first difference from what was obviously cattle skin was found in a
fragment of skin from a neolithic bow from Meare, Somerset, dated 2600
b.c. This had hairs, which, although apparently bovine, were much finer than
those of modern cattle36. Bronze Age burials have yielded other bovine hair
samples because human bodies were often buried in a skin37, and where this
has decayed excavators have sometimes been able to retrieve the hairs. Some
of these examined have been similar to those of the modern ox, whereas
another group found in Scotland were finer like the Meare sample (Table 8).
  The identity of this bovine animal is puzzling. It has a skewed-to-fine
distribution of fibre diameter, and an asymmetric distribution of pigment
within the hair, which are characteristics found in the bison. But the bison is
                                Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep    517


thought to have died out in Britain before the land bridge with the continent
was broken. The wild ox (Bos primigenius), a cousin of the bison, on the other
hand is known from skeletal remains to have persisted until the Bronze Age38,
and so it is possible that this unidentified bovine with finer hair was in fact the
wild ox.
  It may be therefore that, in contrast to sheep, which have clearly been
selected for fine wool, the change following domestication in cattle has been
towards hairiness. The mean diameter of cattle hair from ancient and modern
samples including that from the supposedly primitive Highland cattle, falls
within the range 35 to 50^ (Table 8). This range is supported by unpublished
measurements made on a number of British breeds by Dr. D. McEwan
Jenkinson, who did find, however, that the few Galloway cattle investigated
had a mean hair diameter of about 30/x, which could possibly indicate a
primitive status for this breed. The Walcheren, King Fergus Isle and
Chillingham samples, are, on the other hand much coarser than the normal
cattle range (Table 8).
  But until more evidence becomes available, the possibility that these
unidentified ancient specimens are wild cattle must remain a tentative
suggestion, and their true identity must remain a mystery.



      Appendix

     Methods and criteria on which fleece type is decided


The method of examining skin is a modification of the normal histological
technique39. Wool fibres are examined in whole mount, and the diameter of
100 fibres from each sample is measured using a projection microscope at a
magnification of 500 X.
 The criteria on which fleece type is decided have evolved as more and more
samples have been examined, and are based on the measurements found in
modern breeds. Although the mean diameter, and the diameter distribution
are taken into account, the upper limit of the diameter range is the deciding
factor (see Fig. 2). Thus a fleece with a symmetrical (statistically normal)
distribution, and a maximum fibre diameter between 30 and 40/x (one p
(micron) = o-ooi mm.) would be regarded as a true fine type. The shortwool,
too, has a symmetrical diameter distribution, but has a mean diameter of about
25/x compared with a mean of about 20/x in the fine wool. A skewed-to-fine
diameter distribution appears to be a primitive feature and if this occurred in a
fleece with an upper limit above 35^, it would be regarded as a fine variety of
the generalized medium wool (i.e. fine/generalized medium wool).
  The generalized medium wool is characterized by a skewed-to-fine distri¬
bution, and a maximum diameter about 55/u The true medium wool has a
symmetrical diameter distribution with an upper limit of about 60/x, whereas
518   Part IV Animals      RYDER



                                                                   c3
                                                                   £
                                                                   u
                                                                   O
                     3
                    -C>
                                                                   CO
                                                                   3           3
                                                                   O           O
                                                                   3           3
                                                                   3
                                                                              .a*4-J
                                                             a g a
                                                         t>, o B o
                                                                               3
                                                                               O
                                                         S' u <3 cj            cj


                                                         >o O      vo          On
                                                         m 3-                  O




                               3"          00      (S    Tf O                 NO
                               o      o    O M           <N vo                00
                  s §                      *-< M         M   W
                  •2 *         I
                              CO
                                      rN   4 4           4 4       ooi         I
                                                                               Tf
                                                                   (N




                              45 -3 <L>      .. X                  XI         -3
                               o u t3      1>      CJ              u           CJ
                               3 3 0       V. 3                    3           3
                               6 6 6                               6           a



                    £


                    Q




                    co
                               3 £3   C X-
                               u 3 .2 d g
                                M b u S X
                               J2 3 cd <u o
                               SmKOU

                                           VO
                                           VO                      xi
                                                                    CJ
                                           a                        CO
                                           w                       '3)
                                           T3 "d                               T>
                                             3 3                   ’o           3
                                             a               3                  Ctf
                                           7j Tj             <L>   N            4->
                     u                       o o                          O
                     ?*.                     u cj                   3     cj
                     3                     CO CO                    <D   CO
                     O                                              <D
                    CO                       a3 a3           <u
                                                                   Hh u g
                                                                       5 3
                                             <u <u                       co      <U
                                             CO    CO        h
                                             3      3                    6 3
                                           ss
                                           73 73                         6 ■«
                                             3 3                         3 C
                                           .2 .2                   Ph    <u o
                                             CCj    c3
                                    Q Z    ZZ                Z     QSZ
                                                                                   Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep                                                                                                                 519


                                                                                                                                 w i>
                                                                                                                                 d- O'
                                                                                                                                           •>
                                                                                                                   tJ
                                                                                                                   d             CL»}
                                                                                                                   d             a
                                                                                                                                 O bii
                                                                                                                                 d •£<
dO                                                              <D       (U                                                      v ti
                                                                s        d                                                       bo
 d
S                                                 £<L> £)                                             £<L>
3                                                                        1
                                                                                                                   a             u a
                                                                                                                                 c
 oo                                       O J*5 ^ ^ M
                                          4—1    CO     00      C/3      C/D
                                                                                                  44
                                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                                                 U
VO                                        ro Ov 00 00
                                          <r^ M M M M
                                                                         d                            o
                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                    (U
 *r\
                   3 d                                                                                                           13K 1
                                                                                                                   "d
                                                                                                                    4—*
                                                                                                                     o>>         ,S
                                                                                                                                                            Ov
                                                                                                                   Ph
 O
VO         N o                            VO (N vo VO 00                             o § vo                                                                 a
 M                                         Tf Tt rj- ’t                             VO h VO                        6o
           TV                             OI 1 I 1 voI
                                                                                                                                 ^ M
 I
           ^ 4f                                  00 00 00                           oI O 2                                        C<
                                                                                                                                                             O'
                                                                                                                                                             N
 fS                                       N
                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                    d            <0 N
                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                   cd              . G
                                                                                                                                 ^ O                        Co
                                                                                                                     <L>
                                                                                                                     00
                     d
                      <u                                                                                            <                      u
                     d                         d)                                   1)                               <L)N                  <L>
                                                                                                                                          43
                      u
                      0                        CTJ                                  03                               d
                      0                        5H                                   5h
                                                                                    <L>               <U             on                                     £
 43
  O
           43         I)
                      5-4
                                               <U   v _
                                           <u ^3 d I) d                             d                 d             PQ
  2                   4—•                  d 0 d -*-1 •*-*
                                           0
                                                                                     0                  o
                       O
  6         a       1 d                    d esaa                                    a                               C3
                                                                                                                                  o J?
                                                                                                                    H-J                                       d
                                                                                                                                  Kft                       3
                                                                                                                                                            C/3
                                                                                                        <L>
                                                                                                                                  is                          d)
                                                                                                                                                              5h
                                            <D                                                      6                                                         d
                                            a                                                                                     S|
              o Td xl                       6                                                  '5 '
                                                                                                <D £
                                                                                                    >,
                                                                                                                      <u                                      <u
                                                                                                                                                             ■a
              *3        <U       l>         y*~>
                    sil- A                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                      >>          "•Pi *-ia
              XXX
              XXX                                           X        X         I               Is                    PS               _     d                 d
                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                   d                              o
                                                <D (1) W <D                                     <L>                  d  d          >d g>
                                                Ml bB M M                                      44
                                             «<<<<                                                                                 bD                  d ad d d d d d
                                            43 <u <u o u                                                             S3             §< “               d
                                                                                                                                                           32335  ^                               d
                                             *3 N N N N                                                                                                d P^
                                            73 S3 (3 S3 C
                                             9 o o o o                                                                              a<                 <u




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Table 8 Summary of cattle hair measurements (microns).
                                                                                          I u                                                          4P      ro d d vo d d d
                                            %mm«w                                         1 u<DX
                                                                                                                                   ^    a                     vo vo vo vo vo vo vo
                                                                                                                                   ^H ruO              d Q\ o\ o\ G\ o\ o\ o\
                                                                                                CL
                                                                                                                                   on ^                d
                                                                                       d
                                                                                       05c/3
                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                     X a
                                                                                      0d                                           dd L

                                                      ,<D                      a
                                                                                     <ato                               o          K
                                                                                                                                      Li .d
                                                <L> LLi                        3
                                                                                         4<S O
                                                                                                                        U
                                                O G     ^ C/3
                                                                                          “ <u                                        >         (/)

                                                Z) oft <U <L>                             CO t_j                                      2^
                                                       > X
                                                             o5-i 'rt                    X rt                                         - a
                                                                                                                                      <D
                                                <L>
                                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                d      ?,?a,5§S33
                                                hi +_J<L> 'd oo is
                                                c3     00
                                                             X
                                                             4-*
                                                                                         TJ ^
                                                                                          a|
                                                                                                                        3             OJ        5-1
                                                (U cfl (U X O
                                                                                         .p •s                           <L>          wrq
                                                                                                                                      O _rj
                                                                      < pH               V*      4—1                     X
                                                                                                  03                                  (D
                                                                                                 •5—*                                 d
                                                                                                  OJ                                             5-1
                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                  <u                                  o




                                                                                                                                                                                                              (/) Ryder, M. L. (1964)- ibid.
                                                                                                                            O   ro a
                                                                                                  1) /—N
                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                            <L> Ov                     S !S |3 |3 jo |S jo |o
                o                                                                                 o ^                      P4
                o                                                                                 o 8                              ON •
      Is       N                                                                                  L> Q                          a
                                                                                                                           ’d*  a b-G'
                                                                                                                                    . vo                vovovovovovovovo
               *dbO                                                                               d
                                                                                                  o^
                                                                                                              ^            vo                    OV     OvOvOvOvOvOvOvOv
                   5h                                                                                                       Ov
       i t3        3                                                                              s?0-) so
       •r   sCtJ                                                                                      5h      07                >u
       f         [§                                                                                                                        hJl-3l4i—)i—JhJhJhJ
        O u  <u  *3                                                                                   g§                       o M • •
       d         w                                                                                        f.
                                                                                                                              CO 5-1 d vo
                                                                                                                                 « < I
         5h
         <D ”g'd                                                                                      <ud                        d „ V~\
       X q        <l>                                                                                                            % u t> (UDWOWWOd)          t—1       J—i   5—1   5—1   l   L-i   L-<   5—1

         rt 43q <uu                                                                                                         3 a d<uu d<D w d d d d d d d d
         cd O d d5h ^                                                                                                            -'>> d
       X              d                                                             K -d                      <u            d CV 00 p< a
                 d O
                   - 5h                                                             5-                        Q.
               tci X‘ fO
     <D\ x ti fl3 S -2
                                                                                                                                                        d *>                      bo^; :
       X

 § « y ,£P g S g^S                                                                  ^ §                       §
                  ? £                                                                                         W
 So
 -dopaa                      *        *
520    Part IV Animals      RYDER


the hairy medium wool has a skewed-to-fine distribution with a few hairs
greater than 6071 in diameter. The hairy type has a continuous (although often
skewed-to-fine) distribution with a relatively high proportion of hairy (i.e.
medullated) fibres that are often over 100/z in diameter.




       Notes
        1 Ryder, M. L. (i960). A study of the coat of the Mouflon Ovis musimon
           with special reference to seasonal change, Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond., 135, pp.
           387-408.
        2 Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100.
        3 Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968). Wool Growth. London.
        4 Wright, N. C. (1954). The ecology of domestic animals, in Hammond, J.
           (ed.) Progress in the Physiology of Farm Animals, 1. London, pp. 191-251.
        5 Flannery, K. V. ibid.
        6 Ryder, M. L. (1959). Sheep of the ancient civilizations. Wool Knowledge,
          4 (12), pp. 10-14.
        7 Ryder, M. L. Unpublished data.
        8 Mayr, E. (1942). Systematics atid the Origin of Species. New York.
       9 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). Fleece evolution in domestic sheep, Nature, Lond.,
          204, pp. 555-9.
      10 Rosenqvist, A. M. (1964). Investigations of woollen fibres in the Oseberg
          find, Proc. Int. Conf. on Conservation, pp. 133-6. Delft.
      11 Ryder, M. L. (1964b). The history of sheep breeds in Britain, Agric. Hist.
          Rev., 12 (1), pp. 1-12 and (2), pp. 68-82; Ryder, M. L. (1968a). The
          evolution of Scottish breeds of sheep, Scot. Stud., 12.
      12 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.
      13 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. (1968a). ibid.
      14 Ryder, M. L. (1966a). Coat structure in Soay sheep, Nature, Lond., 211,
          pp. 1092-3; Ryder, M. L. (1968b). Fleece structure in some native and
          unimproved breeds of sheep, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 85, pp. 143-170.
      15 Ryder, M. L. (1961). A specimen of Asiatic sheepskin from the fourth or
          fifth century B.C., Aust.J. Sci., 24, pp. 246-8.
      16 Ryder, M. L. (1966a). ibid.
      17 Ryder, M. L. (1966b). Coat structure and seasonal shedding in goats,
          Anim. Prod., 8, pp. 289-302.
      18 Ryder, M. L. (1963a). Remains derived from skin, in Brothwell, D. R. and
          Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London.
      19 Ryder, M. L. (1962). The histological examination of skin in the study
          of the domestication of sheep, Z. Tierzucht. ZuchtBiol., 77, pp. 168-71.
      20 Ryder, M. L. (1962). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968).
          ibid.
      21 Flannery, K. V. (1965). The ecology of early food production in Meso¬
          potamia, Science, 147, pp. 1247-56.
      22 Yadin, Y. (1963). The Finds from the Bar-Kokhba Period in the Cave of the
          Letters. Jerusalem.
      23 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.
      24 Fraser, A. S. and Hamada, M. K. O. (1952). Observations on the birth-
          coats and skins of several breeds and crosses of British sheep, Proc. Roy.
          Soc. Edin., B, 64, pp. 462-77.
      25 Bowden, P. J. (1962). The Wool Trade in Tudor and Stuart England.
          London.
      26 Ryder, M. L. Unpublished data.
                           Changes in the fleece of domesticated sheep     521

27 Ryder, M. L. (1959). ibid.
28 Ryder, M. L. (1964a). ibid.
29 Ryder, M. L. (1964b). ibid.
30 Ryder, M. L. (1968b). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. (1968c). The wools of Britain.
   (Paper presented at Brit. Ass. 1967) to be published in The Wool Textile
   Industry in Great Britain. London.
31 Ryder, M. L. (1968a). ibid.
32 Nahlik, A. (1963). The textiles of Novgorod, Akedemi Nauk, 123 (IV),
   p. 228.
33 Ryder, M. L. (1968b). ibid.
34 Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968). ibid.
35 Short, B. F. (1958). Dominant felting lustre mutant fleece-type in
   Australian Merino sheep, Nature, Lond., 181, pp. 1414-15.
36 Ryder, M. L. (1963b). Report on the Meare skin, Proc. Prehist. Soc., 29,
   p. 98.
37 Piggott, S. (1962). Heads and hoofs, Antiquity, 36, pp. 110-18.
38 Shawcross, F. W. and Higgs, E. S. (1961). The excavation of a Bos
   primigenius at Lowe’s farm, Littleport, Proc. Cain. Ant. Soc., 54, pp. 3-16.
39 Ryder, M. L. (1963a). ibid.; Ryder, M. L. and Stephenson, S. K. (1968).
   ibid.
Part V: Human nutrition
      N. A. BARNICOT

      Human nutrition: evolutionary perspectives


The domestication of plants and animals initiated major changes in human
ecology. These changes, leading to larger settled communities and ultimately
to the amenities of urban life, may be regarded as beneficial, but they also
had dangers. Settled cultivators must face the threat of famine due to the
vagaries of weather and the onslaughts of pests, whereas hunter-gatherers,
exploiting a wider range of foodstuffs and with fewer mouths to feed, are
likely to be more secure in this respect. It is true that incidents of starvation
have been recorded among Eskimos and among aborigines of the Central
Australian Desert but these habitats are rather extreme and probably atypical
of the long hunting-gathering phase of human history. Plant domestication
can also lead to over-emphasis of a single staple such as rice, maize, cassava
or plantain; if this staple is poor in certain nutrients deficiency disease may
result.
   Apart from the direct effects on nutrition, the change from food collecting
to food production obviously involved a host of secondary changes in human
ecology and these may have greatly altered the nature and magnitudes of
evolutionary selective pressures to which human populations were exposed.
The creation of novel micro-environments by human interference led in some
cases to closer contact with disease vectors, such as mosquitoes carrying
malaria or rats carrying plague-infected fleas. The larger communities made
possible by efficient agriculture provided a more stable reservoir for various
pathogens and crowded, sedentary conditions favoured transmission of
microbial diseases.
   If domestication was a revolution in the human food quest it was not the
first, at least if we take man’s more remote ancestors into account. At some
stage there must have been a transition from a largely vegetarian diet to a
hunting economy providing significant amounts of meat. On an even longer
evolutionary time scale the change was more complex. Many primitive
mammals, including some lemurs, eat a variety of small animal food. Pre¬
sumably the monkeys and apes, which are predominantly vegetarian, evolved
from such creatures and it is a reasonable inference that the earlier members
of the hominid lineage were also vegetarians, though the evidence is scanty
526   Part V Human nutrition      barnicot


  In the last twenty years or so much new evidence relating to these problems
has come to hand and it may be useful to mention some of it briefly. First,
there have been important discoveries of fossils showing features transitional
to man and second, there has been a resurgence of studies on wild primates.
  According to Petter1, some Madagascar lemurs such as Phaner furcifer and
Microcebus murinus eat considerable amounts of small animal food. Dauben-
tonia, a highly specialized nocturnal form, lives mainly on insect larvae.
On the other hand Lemur was never seen to eat animal prey, while Lepilemur
and the Indridae are vegetarians restricted to a rather narrow range of plant
foods.
  Baboons, which differ from most other non-human primates in living on
the ground and usually, though not exclusively, in open savannah, are pre¬
dominantly vegetarians, eating a great range of plant species. At the Cape2
they live on certain flowers, bulbs, and cones, varying their diet according to
seasonal availability. In the Kenya grasslands they subsist mainly on the seeds,
shoots and rhizomes of grasses throughout the year. Insects are usually a
minor dietary component and young mammals are only occasionally killed
and eaten. Troops living near the shore at the Cape often ate mussels and
limpets. Evidently baboons show a good deal of dietary adaptability. Observa¬
tion on the Japanese macaque3 showed that troops living in essentially the
same habitat might differ considerably in the plant foods habitually exploited
and also in their propensity to adopt new foods introduced by humans.
Some species of monkey are more specialized in their dietary habits. The
Colobidae are leaf eaters, sometimes gaining their water supply from this
source as well as solid nutrients and showing anatomical modifications of the
stomach.
  Monkeys are of course only distantly related to man but these studies may
provide some basis for informed speculation about the food habits of the
Oligocene or early Miocene forms from which the Hominidae evolved.
  The anthropoid apes of today, notably the chimpanzee and gorilla, show
many resemblances to man at the gross anatomical, chromosomal and
molecular levels and, according to some workers, may have diverged from the
hominid lineage as late as the Pliocene. Chimpanzees in the rain forest of
Uganda4 ate many species of vegetable food and very seldom insects. In
more open deciduous woodland, however, Goodall5 saw them eat gall-fly
larvae, ants and termites and they occasionally killed small mammals. Here again
we have evidence of local variation in dietary habits. Mountain gorillas
according to Schaller6 live in country ranging from lowland rain forest to
mountain forest and bamboo, exploiting a different range of plants in each
habitat.
  Turning to the fossils the most interesting in relation to human evolution
are the Australopithecinae recovered from early Pleistocene deposits in South
and East Africa. The evidence of the pelvis and lower limb shows that these
small-brained and large-jawed creatures were capable of bipedalism. It has
                            Evolutionary perspectives in human nutrition      527

long been recognized that bipedalism, by freeing the hands for manipulation,
may have been a critical factor in the emergence of tool using and making.
At Makapan in South Africa Dart found many ungulate bones associated with
australopithecine remains and he suggested that some were used as tools and
may have inflicted the fractures found on baboon skulls from these deposits.
Pebble tools have been found at Sterkfontein, another australopithecine site
and at Olduvai, Leakey7 found them on a living floor along with an australo¬
pithecine skull and the broken bones of small mammals, birds and reptiles
which he regarded as the food debris of this creature. Two species of Aus¬
tralopithecus are commonly recognized. One (A. robustus or Paranthropus) has
massive jaws and molar teeth, while in the other (A. africanus) these features
are less pronounced. Robinson8 has suggested that the former retained the
ancestral vegetarian habit while in the latter hunting for meat was more
developed. However the Olduvai form mentioned above [Zinjanthr opus
boisei or A. boisei) is of the robustus type despite its apparent association with
tools and animal food. Later more remains were found at this horizon and
also above and below it. These are claimed to be significantly more advanced
(i.e. man-like) than A. boisei and it is suggested that this form, named Homo
habilis, was the tool maker. Similarly it has been suggested that a more
gracile jaw found at Sterkfontein (Telanthropus) represents the tool making
population at this site. It is apparent that the interpretation of these very
interesting fossils is not unequivocal and it is still a subject for much con¬
troversy.
   Remains of still earlier hominids are much less abundant. Simons9 has
recently re-examined fossil primate material from the Upper Miocene and
Lower Pliocene of Northern India which includes jaw fragments assignable to
Ramapithecus. The small canine teeth, molar cusp pattern and short face lead
him to classify this form as a hominid and to conjecture that some of the
features in which the australopithecines approach man were already fore¬
shadowed in this fourteen million year old fossil.
  There is of course much archaeological material testifying to the hunting
activities of man from the Middle Pleistocene onwards. The remains of
hearths at Choukoutien indicate that cooking, at least in the form of roasting,
may have been practised half a million years ago. This practice certainly
distinguishes man from other primates. While making accessible certain
foods which would otherwise be rather indigestible it may, like other types
of food processing, lead to loss of nutrients. Archaeological sites sometimes
yield good evidence of the kinds of large mammals most hunted but it is
difficult to form a quantitative picture of the diets of prehistoric man,
especially the significance of vegetable foods. As Brothwell10 suggests a
search for human faecal remains might yield valuable evidence but it is not
likely to be successful unless conditions were unusually dry.
   When we turn to the literature on modern hunter-gatherers we find lists
of the plant and animal species exploited but very little about the amounts
528   Part V Human nutrition      barnicot


of each consumed and their nutritional value. The reasons for this are obvious.
Quantitative surveys are not easy to conduct on settled communities and even
more difficult on nomadic hunters who may seek food individually or in small
groups over an extensive area and may consume significant amounts in the
bush rather than in camp. The nutritional values of most of their foods will
not be found in standard food tables and must be determined by laborious
analyses. The availability of major foods is likely to vary with season so that a
satisfactory study must extend over at least a year. There are some studies
of Eskimos, for example that of Hoygaard11 at Angmassalik in East Greenland,
but Eskimos, although nutritionally very interesting, exemplify a rather
special type of hunting economy. There is also McArthur’s12 fine attempt to
study Arnhem Land aborigines. These people, although living for much of
their time in settlements, still retained the skills necessary for periodic
episodes of bush life. The survey lasted only twenty-two days and therefore
gives only a glimpse of the nutritional economy of this type of existence.
Data on African hunter-gatherers such as Kalahari Bushmen and the Hadza
of Lake Eyasi are to be expected in the next few years.
  Yudkin13 has raised the interesting question of the factors determining
food choice and the possibility that man retains an innate predilection for
certain kinds of food. Obviously human diets are immensely varied and the
things which are regarded as fit to eat differ greatly from one culture to
another. Whether or not certain innate appetites exist it is clear that custom
and belief play a great part in determining food habits. Not infrequendy
they lead to neglect of nutritionally valuable foods such as eggs and fish.
Animals, such as pigs in New Guinea and cattle in many African pastoral
peoples are often desired more for prestige than as sources of meat14. The
human psyche is apt to surround matters concerning food with values foreign
to textbooks of nutrition.
  I have spoken of the evolutionary background of human food habits.
The mechanisms of evolutionary change are now better understood than
they were in Darwin’s time, thanks largely to great advances in genetics, both
experimental and theoretical. The discovery of many simply inherited varia¬
tions of proteins and blood group substances in man, has given us a vivid
picture of the great amount of genetical variability both between individuals
and between one population and another. For the most part we do not know
how this intrapopulation variability is maintained or what has caused regional
variation in gene frequencies but we suppose that natural selection must
have played an important role and we are always on the look out for functional
differences that may give particular genes selective value. It is virtually
certain that diet, as a major component of the human environment, must
have exerted such effects but we still have very little good evidence. One
case in point is the condition known as favism15 in which a mutant gene
causing deficiency of an enzyme, renders males, and some females, liable to
serious haemolytic attacks if they eat fava beans. We may also mention galac-
                            Evolutionary perspectives in human nutrition       529

tosemia, a rare inherited condition in which the metabolism of the sugar
of milk is defective. The problem of diabetes, a disease with both genetical
and nutritional components, is too complex to be more than mentioned here.
There must be many other inherited variations in enzymes and other physio¬
logically important proteins which influence individual efficiency in digesting,
absorbing and metabolizing various nutrients. Many of these effects may be
slight and difficult to detect but a search for them may open up new pathways
connecting nutrition with genetics and evolutionary studies.



      Notes
      1 Petter. J. J. (1965). The lemurs of Madagascar, in De Vore, I. (ed.)
        Primate Behaviour: field studies of monkeys and apes, New York. pp. 292-
        319.
      2 De Vore I. and Hall, K. R. (1965). Baboon ecology, in De Vore, I. (ed.)
        op. cit. pp. 20-52.
      3 Kawamura, S. (1963). The process of sub-culture propagation among
        Japanese macaques, in Southwick, C. H. (ed.) Primate Social Behaviour.
        London and New York. pp. 82-90.
      4 Reynolds, V. and Reynolds, F. (1965). Chimpanzees of the Budongo
        forest, in De Vore, I. (ed.) op. cit. pp. 368-424.
      5 Goodall, J. (1965). Chimpanzees of the Gombe Stream Reserve, in De
        Vore, I. (ed.) op. cit. pp. 425-73.
      6 Schaller, G. B. (1965). The behaviour of the Mountain Gorilla, in De
        Vore, I. (ed.) op. cit. pp. 324-67.
      7 Leakey, L. S. B. (1959). A new fossil skull from Olduvai, Nature, Lond.,
        184, pp. 491-3-
      8 Robinson, J. T. (1964). Some critical phases in the evolution of man, S'.
        African archaeol. Bull. 19, pp. 3-12.
      9 Simons, E. L. (1964). On the mandible of Ramapithecus, Proc. Nat. Acad.
        {Wash.), 51, pp. 528-35.
     10 Brothwell, D. R., this volume, pp. 531-45.
     11 Hoygaard, A. (1941). Studies on the Nutrition and Physiopathology of
        Eskimos. Oslo.
     12 McArthur, M. (i960). Food consumption and dietary levels of groups of
        aborigines living on naturally occurring foods, in Records of the American-
        Australian Scientific Expedition to Arnhem Land, II, pp. 90-135.
     13 Yudkin, J., this volume, pp. 547-52.
     14 Cranstone, B. A. L., this volume, pp. 247-63.
     15 For further details see Brothwell, D. R., this volume, ibid.
.
      D. R. BROTHWELL

      Dietary variation and the biology of earlier
      human populations

Studies on the biology of earlier human populations are relevant to a full
consideration of the impact of domestication in two ways:

1 The detailed examination of actual human remains may help to reconstruct
  the nutritional status of an early population, including dietary insufficiency.
  Early textual evidence of population health can at times help to substantiate
  or even extend our knowledge in this respect.
2 From an archaeological point of view, the most significant factor of all
  in the study of domestication, is that it greatly modified the living and
  livelihood of earlier groups, so that the demography of these populations
  underwent marked changes, and in some respects there probably emerged
  greater heterogeneity in terms of population composition than had been
  possible in earlier cultures. This may be tentatively deduced from the
  theoretical extrapolation back in time from historical facts about popula¬
  tions, and from modern demographic and palaeodemographic findings
  (which includes certain archaeological distribution data).

  An examination of human remains usually amounts to the study of skeletal
material, although in a few regions of the world soft tissues may remain
(Egypt, Peru, American South-west, Aleutian and Canary Islands). In recent
years, coprolites have been recognized as another valuable source of informa¬
tion on man, and one especially relevant to a consideration of earlier diets1.
  Regrettably, earlier archaeologists, in their hypnotic pursuit of habitations
and pottery, have ignored these “coarser” aspects of human life, and thus
only now are dried faeces being actively searched for at New and Old World
sites. What little information I shall have time to present will, I hope, help
to persuade more excavators to become enthusiastic about the lavatories as
well as the villas and palaces of earlier populations.
  But first, what sort of information can be derived from skeletal remains ?
Again, some comment of omission is necessary, for until recently, more time
was given to craniometry than to exploring possible ways in which the
environment might have influenced skeletal growth and variation. Thus, we
532   Part V Human nutrition       brothwell


know practically nothing about the variations in bone density or thickness of
cortical tissue, and to what extent the differences which do occur are deter¬
mined by nutritional as well as genetic and age factors. That bone density
differences occur in modern human populations seems reasonably established2,
and recently attempts have been made to get comparable results on excavated
skeletal material (on the now extinct Sadlermiut Eskimo group). Mazess3
concludes that their high bone densities may be influenced in part, but not
wholly, by their specialized animal food diet.
  Similarly, there is growing information on the thickness variation in com¬
pact bone of some modern groups, where again age, sex and race, as well as
diet, are clearly important factors4. It may well be that this type of investiga¬
tion will be more applicable to the study of early skeletal series5 than density
analyses, owing to the added problem of post-mortem changes in prehistoric
and protohistoric skeletons (PI. vn, b, c). In any case, it is obvious that such
lines of enquiry must in future be considered when investigating earlier
populations, especially where racial similarity but marked dietary divergence
are suspected. From the point of view of results meaningful to the archaeolo¬
gist, discussion of this subject is alas five or ten years too soon!
  Perhaps the link between studies on ancient diets and skeletons can be
most convincingly demonstrated by reference to certain well defined abnor¬
malities detectable in bones or teeth, and to certain historic references to
early copulation health. Again, I want to emphasize problems and possibili¬
ties, as well as present facts.



       Vitamin D deficiency

This results in rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults, and can certainly
produce the most pronounced skeletal deformities of any dietary deficiency
condition. In particular, marked bowing of the femur, tibia and fibula may
result. On theoretical grounds, one might reasonably expect that the early
cereal cultivators may at times have relied too heavily on high carbohydrate
diets, and if too few fish and dairy foods (or sunlight) were available then
rickets would appear. Surprisingly, however, although vast numbers of
prehistoric and protohistoric skeletons have been examined in Europe and
North Africa alone, evidence of this deficiency disease is very scanty. In sum,
there are only one or two possible cases of bowing, and post-mortem deforma¬
tion may account for some. Possibly the only convincing prehistoric case in
Northern Europe is seen in a pair of tibiae from the Danish neolithic site of
Raevehoj. This rarity of the condition during much earlier times contrasts
noticeably with city samples dated to the industrial revolution, and for
instance the St. Bride’s Church skeletal series (London, c. 1750-1850) shows
some degree of rickets deformity in 6-9% of 233 individuals6. However, I
would not wish to argue that periodic and localized rickets did not occur
                                                  Early dietary variation   533

earlier, and it may perhaps be significant that Soranus of Ephesus (a.d.
98-138) refers to rachitic-like deformities of the legs in children in Italy,
while Chinese literature of the third century b.c. refers to crooked legs and
hunchback7.



      Scurvy

As well as a marked deterioration in oral health, vitamin C deficiency (scurvy)
can sometimes result in post-cranial changes, including vertebral collapse
(though none are pathognomonic). The broad omnivorous diet of early hunt¬
ing and collecting peoples and the probable availability, at least seasonably,
of fruit and vegetables to the early cultivators would certainly not encourage
this condition. However, it would be worth making a search for possible
evidence of this disease, and indeed I have been recently debating whether
some of the relatively numerous cases of vertebral collapse in Amerindian
skeletons might have resulted from scurvy. Certainly they are not all the
result of senile osteoporosis. In Europe, both Hippocrates and Pliny were
acquainted with the disease, but whether it occurred in villages and towns
ordinarily, or only in times of war and unrest, is debatable.



      Vitamin A and B-complex deficiencies

Deficiencies in vitamin A and B do not result in marked bone changes, but
there is some information about them nevertheless. Inadequate vitamin A
commonly results in nyctalopia. Possibly the earliest reference to this “night
blindness” is in the Ebers Papyrus (c. 1600 B.C.), followed by Hippocrates,
and later in Chinese literature (a.d. 610). Early communities specializing
in intensive cereal cultivation with minimal hunting or stockbreeding, would
be especially likely to this health hazard. Beriberi (B1 deficiency) may have
been a serious problem in eastern Asia for some millennia; at least it is men¬
tioned in the Su Wen, a Chinese text of c. 2690 B.C. A good example of mass
involvement in such a disease is recorded in the long siege of T’ai Ch’eng
(a.d. 529), when nine-tenths of the population of 120,000 developed swelling
of the body, shortness of breath and died8. Similarly, Strabo mentions the
condition in Roman troops.
  Pellagra (B2 deficiency) is not known for sure from earlier New World
cultures, but might be inferred from its occurrence in some parts of Central
America today, and the great reliance placed upon maize by Maya and Aztec
economies.
534   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell




      Iodine insufficiency

This is a localized phenomenon, related to iodine deficient soils in various
parts of the world. One might question, however, whether the more sedentary
nature of many populations during post-mesolithic times might have further
encouraged thyroid malfunction. Certainly skeletal evidence of cretinism
would be worth searching for in areas recently affected. Pliny was certainly
aware of endemic goitre in some Alpine areas.



      General famine

Whereas in palaeolithic hunting and collecting economies there must have
been a continual “trimming away” of the older and less healthy members of
the group, relative to the abundance of food in a particular area, the neolithic
revolution encouraged vast changes. Extended food resources, and perhaps
better storage methods, permitted survival to the point where severer climatic
fluctuations or plant and animal disease precipitated a general food crisis
on a scale rather unlikely in earlier cultures.
  There is of course textual and even art evidence (Fig. i) for famines,
extending back patchily over four thousand years. China, a country famous
for its food shortages, has over 1800 famines recorded just for the more
recent period 100 b.c. to a.d. 1910. Indeed, the populace, according to a
first century B.C. publication9 attempted to adapt to the food crises after the
agricultural revolution by intentionally growing the water darnel, a weed
tolerant to drought and flood, and thus a valuable provision in times of
shortage.
  At times, famines must have been sufficiently long term to have markedly
influenced child growth in the communities affected. However, although such
crises may have impeded growth, and even resulted in mean adult statures
less than potentially realizable (given a better nutritional standard), it is still
not easy to demonstrate nutritionally induced differences by reference to
skeletal studies. Prior to any such enquiry, one must be fairly confident that
the populations to be considered are derived from the same “stock” (whether
the samples are spatially or temporarily separated). To my knowledge,
Steffensen10 is the only one so far who has been brave enough to try to relate
probable changes in nutritional level with estimated mean stature, in this
case in early Icelanders (Fig. 2). In view of the fact that neolithic and later
prehistoric stature estimates show variation in Europe and South-west Asia,
this type of investigation deserves following up, although much caution needs
to be exercised.
                                                                                    u
Fig i Part of the “famine scene”, causeway of Unas, Saqqara. Dynasty V, c. 2350 b
     Drawing by Rosemary Powers
536   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell


                                           A.D.




           15 -1
  NO.
FAMINE
 YEARS

                       t-r

Fig 2 Changes in mean stature in Iceland during the past eight centuries, in
      comparison with the number of famine years each century. Adapted
      from Steffensen, J. (1958). Stature as a criterion of the nutritional level
      of Viking Age Icelanders, Prieji Viking a fundur, Third Viking Congress,
      pp. 39-51.


      Lathyrism

Dietary specialization may result in shortages of vital food constituents as
exemplified by vitamin deficiencies, but brief mention might also be made
of a condition resulting directly from the over-consumption of one particular
foodstuff. The drought-resistant pulse Lathyrus sativus has at times been
eaten in excessive amounts in parts of southern Europe, Africa and Asia,
especially when famine threatened. Unfortunately, a toxic factor in this food
can result in a spastic paralysis of the lower limbs. Hippocrates, without
understanding the condition, nevertheless writes: “At Ainos, all men and
women who ate continuously peas, became impotent in the legs and that
state perished.” No evidence is as yet forthcoming from skeletal material,
but as the condition possibly results in some degree of disuse atrophy in the
leg bones, the eventual possibility of cases in excavated human remains
must be kept in mind.
  While on the subject of eating pulses, it might be mentioned that in some
individuals—particularly in parts of the Mediterranean area—the eating of
fava beans {Vida fabd) produces favism. This is a haemolytic condition,
                                                  Early dietary variation   537


which can be quite serious, and which seems to be connected with the sex-
linked gene producing the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
disease. However, although there is clearly a “diet-based” selection pressure
operating against these bean eaters, the favism/G6PD deficiency situation
also seems to confer some advantage in resisting malaria. There is thus a
balance of the negative and positive factors, at least in the relevant malarial
areas. The example nevertheless demonstrates that diet can have close genetic¬
microevolutionary associations.



      Oral health

I need not establish the fact here that diet can be detrimental to oral health,
and in particular is a major contributing factor in caries development. The
disease certainly occurred even in fossil man (PI. vna). Differences in caries
frequency in earlier populations and the possible influence of diet has also
been discussed in various journals11. By far the most dramatic increases in
dental decay have in fact taken place during the past two or three centuries,
without doubt as a result of the increased and widespread use of refined flours
and sugar. What happened as a result of the advent of agriculture does not
make such an exciting picture, indeed, although I think it had its effect, there
would seem to have been rather a delayed reaction. Of the various neolithic
dental samples so far studied, there is no significant increase in caries
rate above those for palaeolithic and mesolithic groups and a total sample
(c. 3000-1000 b.c.) of nearly 30,000 teeth show a caries percentage of only
3‘i12.
   By Iron Age times there are noticeable increases in some samples, although
these late prehistoric groups did not simply show a trend in ever higher
figures. The British Bronze Age caries figure is in fact noticeably smaller
than the neolithic one, and I have already questioned whether this might
give support to Childe’s13 suggestion that the former people were more
pastoral and less dependent upon cereals in their diet than the latter group14.
To what extent related geographical/agricultural zones might show caries
rate differences has recently been questioned by Isobel Smith15, from the
point of view of British neolithic “highland” and “lowland” zones. So far,
the regional British neolithic figures I have assembled, for the most part
on inadequate samples, do not seem to suggest any significant variation in
this respect. Again, however, it is the type of enquiry which might eventually
prove revealing in some areas, and by Saxon times in England, there is
certainly evidence of regional variation (Fig. 3).
  Perhaps I should briefly mention certain other aspects of oral health
Enamel hypoplasia has been noted in hominid teeth from early pleistocene
to recent times. It can result from nutritional disturbances, but also from
infective disease, and until this basic problem is explored further—with
538   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell


a view to possible ways of differentiating infective and more chronic
malnutritional types of hypoplasia pattern, then useful conclusions are
impossible.
  Diet may influence periodontal diseases in two ways: (a) by direct but
local effects, such as in the increased calculus deposition and irritation
resulting from a high carbohydrate diet; (b) by systemic effects, as in protein
deficiency periodontitis16. Information on periodontal disease in earlier
populations rests on the careful assessment of alveolar bone loss, and of course
any frequency will greatly underestimate a true frequency of all degrees of
periodontal disease in the living. However, useful comparisons can still be




Fig 3 Regional variation in caries frequencies during Saxon times, as seen in
      the total caries percentage for seven cemetery groups.


made between skeletal series, but as yet there is little standardization of
rating methods, or for that matter results. In a study I have been undertaking
with colleagues17 on early Egyptian groups we are able to demonstrate a marked
increase in alveolar bone loss from predynastic to late dynastic times, and it
would seem reasonable to blame diet in part for this.
  As Alexandersen18 has reviewed the published data in detail, I need not
expand further here, except perhaps to say that alveolar bone loss in early
skeletons may, in certain circumstances, specifically suggest one form of
dietary inadequacy. Thus, Mellquist and Sandberg19 tentatively concluded
that the poor periodontal health in many Norsemen might well have resulted
from scurvy.
                                                    Early dietary variation    539




      Coprolite studies

I have considered at some length the question of dietary variation, and possible
ways in which skeletal and dental studies may assist in “reconstructing” the
food resources of a population. Far less coprolite material is available than
skeletons, and very little information on diet as yet forthcoming from such
remains; but analysis of such material promises much for the future. As I
say, this depends upon the extent of archaeological interest and cooperation.
The laboratory of physical anthropology at the B.M. (N.H.) is only just
beginning investigations of this sort, and I am finding it very difficult to get a
series of coprolite samples for comparative purposes. Incidentally, there
might be other possibilities of food residue collection from the alimentary
tract of long decomposed bodies. Hazzledine Warren20 as long ago as 1911
reported on a prehistoric British skeleton buried in sand in which seed
 remains were identified and removed from the abdominal area. Although the
 burials were not ideal, I have recently tried removal of grave earth from the
 lower abdominal region of Dark Age skeletons, and by differential flotation,
 the removal of organic remains. However, where the grave fill contains a
 variety of organic debris, as in this case, the task of food residue identification
 is doubly difficult.
    Coprolite studies have quite blossomed out in the past ten years. The
 excellent work of Callen and Cameron21 and Callen22 has been followed by
 such detailed work as Watson and Yamell23 and the various papers given in
 No. 70 of the University of California Archaeological Survey (1967) on Nevada
 cave coprolites. Parasitological studies on ancient faeces have been made24
 and even faecal deposits from northern European soils can be rewarding
(PI. viid).
   Coprolites have begun to give precise information on the wide range of
foodstuffs consumed by individuals of differing cultures, and of course have
assisted in establishing the spread and antiquity of certain domesticated
plants. The breadth of potential information is enormous, and even such
data as the number and size of fish bones consumed have clear relevance
to a consideration of calcium intake or the degree to which foods were chewed
or bolted. Work in progress on coprolites from Asiab, Iran by J. R. Harlan,
R. B. Stewart and colleagues, seems to show evidence of geophagia25.



       Diet, demography and microevolution

 “Population” wrote Huxley26, “is the problem of our age.” Though on a
 more modest scale, one just wonders whether the same might be said of the
 period following the agricultural revolution ? World population estimates for
 palaeolithic and mesolithic times vary from five to under twenty millions27.
540   Part V Human nutrition     brothwell


By 3000/4000 B.C. it has been estimated, mainly by extrapolating from the
demographic information on different economic groups today and historic
records, that world population numbers had possibly increased to over
twenty million and as much as ninety million. We now tolerate, three thousand
million! The trouble with using population data on modern “primitive”
populations, as Cook28 emphasizes, is that such people may no longer have
a truly pre-contact diet and have probably been influenced by the diseases of
civilized communities. Thus, however neat the graphs of early population
increase appear, the estimates are really very crude, and we really have no
idea of fertility or what proportion of neolithic people survived into the
reproductive period. The inadequate nature of neolithic skeletons prevents
direct assessment of this latter problem, although this material does enable
us to establish that survival into middle and late adult age groups was not
common. Mean life expectancy for neolithic adults was only about 31-34
years for males and 28-31 years for females (considering data by Angel,
Kobayashi, and Brothwell29, but in fact there was no significant increase of
life expectancy anywhere until about a century ago (when the world popula¬
tion had quietly increased to one thousand million).
   I do not wish to argue that, given the right environment, the temporal
and spacial mosaic of plant and animal domestication did not encourage
varying degrees of population expansion. But I must confess to a gnawing
doubt as to whether, in the case of population growth in post-glacial times
we really put the egg before the chicken. I don’t wish to labour the point, but
simply state the question, in view of its relevance to future palaeodemo-
graphic interpretation. At present we visualize the early cultivators bursting
forth in their new found fertility, but what of the hunters and collectors in
more favourable environments ? Why shouldn’t a fully exploited and adequate
“natural harvest”, permit a many fold expansion of group size, especially if
a few basic methods of food storage were known ? Given increased density,
more effective social organization could arise, and with it pooled ideas for
economic improvements, such as experimental planting of seeds or group
round-up of larger mammals. Jaffe30 gives the population of China in a.d. 2 as
c. 59,000,000, and one wonders to what extent the population was already
tottering by the time rice was introduced perhaps as early as 3000 B.C.
   Clearly, China has tolerated a high density/sub-starvation level at least
back into protohistoric times, so that one might well ask whether in this case
domestication did more than provide temporary relief, and simply permitted
greater population/environment disequilibrium. One tends to forget that
minimal subsistence calorie requirements (preventing serious malnutrition)
can be as low as 1900 for males, ranging down to 1000 in women and children31.
    My contribution to this book seems to be a remarkably gloomy one. The
more direct relationships between diet and disease have already been men¬
tioned, but cultivation and stock rearing resulted in other human health
problems. Polunin32, for instance, argues that the high frequency of malaria
                                                     Early dietary variation    541


in some Malayan aborigines (who practise a shifting agriculture), results
from the fact that the vector, Anopheles maculatus, is able to breed well in the
sunlit streams following forest clearance for cultivation. Similarly, Audy and
Harrison33 show that shifting cultivation encourages the spread of mite-borne
scrub typhus.
    Any tendency for numbers of individuals to cluster together raises health
problems, so that the early farmers possibly encouraged as never before the
build up of certain strains of bacilli and streptococci, as well as parasites of the
roundworm-hookworm type. Food storage and village or longhouse develop¬
ment must have initiated rodent infestation, and with it plague and other
killers. Perhaps, even, the association was sufficient for mutant forms of
murine leprosy to become adapted to man? The development of African
 pastoralism must in parts have been bedevilled by trypanosomiasis34, while
 South-west Asia and the Mediterranean world may have been the earliest
 centres for the transfer of bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis to man. Animal
 disease recorded by Middle Kingdom Egyptians is thought to have included
 anthrax35, and this may well be referred to by Homer, Pliny, and others36.
 In historic times, anthrax has reached epidemic proportions in man, and
 clearly may also have threatened late prehistoric peoples.
    Little of this can be confirmed by reference to early skeletons, although it is
 significant that tuberculosis seems to have been early established in Egypt37,
 and I have very tentatively suggested the presence of brucellosis in Bronze
 Age Jericho38.
    The relationship between dietary change, following the neolithic revolu¬
 tion, and human microevolution is both a new and dangerous field. Kelso and
 Armelagos39 have been brave enough to suggest a relationship between blood
 group frequency and dietary habit; high A beine linked with fat intake, and
 carbohydrate consumption with B. The hypothesis is interesting but at
 present difficult to substantiate40. Shatin41 has also considered the possible
 genetic consequences of dietary changes and population increase. Neolithic
 cultural development and contacts, he suggests, might have influenced out-
 breeding. Like Livingstone42 he believes that the sickle-cell polymorphism
 has probably undergone its most intensive selection among African food-
 producing groups during the past 5000 years. He further debates the reper¬
 cussions of neolithic and later dietary change on the progress diseases as
 divergent as treponematoses, peptic ulceration and coronary disease. This,
 as I say, is a difficult field, but in view of the profound dietary changes which
 have taken place, clearly merits serious attention.
    Finally, a few words about human populations and possible adaptive
 variation resulting from the neolithic economy changes. Coon43 has argued
 that die earliest Old World farmers, which he says were “presumably fight-
 skinned, bearded Caucasoids similar to those still inhibiting the Near East”,
 migrated in bands into northern Europe, North Africa, India and China.
542   Part V Human nutrition      brothwell


The reason why they are not now to be seen in countries such as China he
states is because these people hybridized with the indigenous population—
who were adaptively more successful and thus emerged as the conspicuous
type again. Somehow, this view doesn’t seem satisfactory, and surely the
picture must have been far more complex ? Certainly, there must have been
varied movements of people in search of new productive lands, but at the
same time a cultural “chain reaction” must have ensured the handing on of
domestication ideas and products far more rapidly than human movements.
I am reminded, for instance, of the spread of the banana in the Amazonian
area of South America, where it has reached isolated tribes deep in the
interior.
   It would seem reasonable to say that the agricultural revolution encouraged
a differential increase and expansion of some groups. Population size in the
Mexican and Andean civilizations grew to far more than the total for the rest
of the New World prior to European contact44; African Negro groups also
flourished, and in movements southwards compressed the Khoisan peoples
into far more restricted territories. In South-east Asia, mongoloid expansion
must have been encouraged if not dictated by population pressures, and per¬
haps the non-mongoloid Ainu of Japan represent one of the other Asiatic
stocks brought near to extinction by mongoloid economic competition.
  In populations which expanded too much and too fast, and where environ¬
mental factors caused periodic crop failure, there is the possibility that some
groups may have started to become “famine adapted” for smaller body size
and smaller calorie needs. I state this only in a very tentative way, having
found no convincing data so far to support it. Unfortunately, microevo¬
lutionary factors pull in various ways and directions at once, so that what may
result in body form may be rather a biological “compromise”. Perhaps a
recent speculation by Braes45 is also relevant here, for she debates the possi¬
bility of physical variation having differential survival value in markedly
contrasting earlier cultures and economies. Alas, these are still only ideas,
but perhaps eventually laboratory or field studies may show that here also,
the history of domestication and human biology have significant links46.




      Notes
      1 Callen, E. O. (1963). Diet as revealed by coprolites, in Brothwell, D. and
        Higgs, E. S. (eds.) Science in Archaeology. London, pp. 186-94; Heizer,
        R. F. (1967). Analysis of human coprolites from a dry Nevada cave, Reps.
        Univ. Cal. Archaeol. Survey, Berkeley. 70, pp. 1-20.
      2 Baker, P. T. and Angel, J. L. (1965). Old age changes in bone density:
        sex and race factors in the United States, Hum. Biol. 37, pp. 104-21;
        Baker, P. T. and Little, M. A. (1965). Bone density changes with age,
        altitude, sex and race factors in Peruvians, Hum. Biol., 37, pp. 122-36.
      3 Mazess, R. B. (1966). Bone density in Sadlermiut Eskimo, Hum. Biol.,
        38, pp. 42-9.
                                               Early dietary variation     543


 4 Garn, S. M., Pao, E. M. and Rihl, M. E. (1964). Compact bone in
   Chinese and Japanese, Science, 143, pp. 1439-40; Garn, S. M., Rohmann,
   C. G. and Nolan, P. (1964). The developmental nature of bone changes
   during aging, in J. E. Birren (ed.) Relations of Development and Aging.
   Illinois, pp. 41-61; Garn, S. M. (1966). Malnutrition and skeletal develop¬
   ment in the pre-school child, in Pre-school child Malnutrition. Nat. Acad.
   Sci.-Nat. Res. Coun. Washington, pp. 43-62.
 5 Brothwell, D. R., Molleson, T. I. and Metreweli, C. (1968). Radiological
   aspects of normal variation in earlier skeletons: an exploratory study, in
   D. R. Brothwell (ed.) The Skeletal Biology of Earlier Human Populations,
   pp. 149-72. Oxford.
 6 Powers, R. Personal communication.
 7 Lee, T’ao (1940). Historical notes on some vitamin deficiency diseases in
   China, Chinese Med.J., 58, pp. 314-23.
 8 Hou, H. C. and Yu, C. M. (1940). Beriberi in ancient medical literature,
   Chinese Med.J., 58, pp. 302-13.
 9 Sheng-Han, S. (1965). Translated. On “Fan Sheng-Chih Shu”. An
   Agriculturists Book of China Written by Fan Sheng-Chih in the First
   Century B.C. Peking.
10 Steffensen, J. (1958). Stature as a criterion of the nutritional level of
   Viking Age Icelanders, Prioji Vikingafundur, Third Viking Congress, pp.
   39-51-
11 See Brothwell, D. R. (1959). Teeth in earlier human populations, Proc.
   Nutr. Soc., 18, pp. 59-65; and Brothwell, D. R. (1963). The macro-
   scropic dental pathology of some earlier human populations, in Brothwell,
   D. R. (ed.) Dental Anthropology, pp. 271-88. Oxford, for earlier literature.
12 Brothwell, D. R. (1963). ibid.
13 Childe, V. G. (1949). Prehistoric Communities of the British Isles. London.
14 Brothwell, D. R. (i960). The Bronze Age people of Yorkshire; a general
   survey, Adv. Sci., 16, pp. 311-32.
15 Smith, I. F. (1964) in Field, N. H., Matthews, C. L. and Smith, I. F.
   New Neolithic sites in Dorset and Bedfordshire, with a note on the
   distribution of Neolithic storage-pits in Britain, Proc. Prehist. Soc.,
   3°j PP- 355-6o.
16 Bradford, E. W. (1959). Food and the periodontal diseases, Proc. Nutr.
   Soc., 18, pp. 59-65.
17 C. Wood Robinson and H. G. Carr. Unpublished data.
18 Alexandersen, V. (1967). The pathology of the jaws and the temporo¬
   mandibular joint in Brothwell, D. R. and Sandison, A. T. (eds.) Diseases
   in Antiquity. Illinois, pp. 551-95-
19 Mellquist, C. and Sandberg. T. (1939). Odontological studies of about
   1400 Mediaeval skulls from Halland and Scania in Sweden and from the
   Norse Colony in Greenland and a contribution to the knowledge of their
   anthropology, Odont. T. Supp., 3B.
20 Warren, S. H. (1911). On a prehistoric interment near Walton-on-Naze,
   Essex Naturalist., 16, pp. 198-208.
21 Callen, E. O. and Cameron, T. W. M. (i960). A prehistoric diet revealed
   in coprolites. New Scientist, 8, pp. 35-40.
22 Callen, E. O. (1963). Diet as revealed by Coprolites, in Brothwell D. R.
   and Higgs, E. S. op. cit., pp. 186—94; Callen, E. O. (1965). Food habits
   of Some Pre-Columbian Mexican Indians, Econ. Bot., 19, pp. 335-43.
23 Watson, P. J. and Yarnell, R. A. (1966). Archaeological and Paleoethno-
   logical investigations in Salts Cave, Mammoth Cave National Park,
   Kentucky, Amer. Antiquity, 31, pp. 842-9.
24 Samuels, R. (1965). Parasitological study of long-dried fecal samples,
   Mem. Soc. Am. Archaeol., 19, pp. 175-9; Tubbs, D. Y. and Berger, R.
544   Hart V Human nutrition       brothwell


         (1967). The variability of pathogens in ancient human coprolites, Reps
         Univ. Cal. Archaeol. Survey, Berkeley, 70, pp. 89-92; Pike, A. W. (1967).
         The recovery of parasite eggs from ancient cesspit and latrine deposits:
         an approach to the study of early parasite infections, in Brothwell D. R.
         and Sandison, A. T. op. cit., pp. 184-8.
      25 Braidwood, R. V., Personal communication.
      26 Huxley, J. (1957). New Bottles for New Wine. London.
      27 Huxley, J. (1957). ibid; Deevey, E. S. (i960). The human population,
         Scientific American, 203, pp. 194-204.
      28 Cook, S. F. (1947). Survivorship in aboriginal populations. Hum. Biol.,
         19, pp. 83-9.
      29 Angel, J. L. (1947). The length of life in Ancient Greece, J. Gerontol.,
         2, pp. 18-24; Kobayashi, K. (1967). Trend in the length of life based on
         human skeletons from prehistoric to modern times in Japan, J. Fac. Sci.
         Univ. Tokyo., Sect. V, 3, pp. 109-60; Brothwell, D. R. (1968). The
         human biology of the Neolithic population in Britain (in press).
      30 Jaffe, A. J. (1947). Notes on the rate of growth of the Chinese population.
         Hum. Biol., 19, pp. 1-11.
      31 Davidson, S. and Passmore, R. (1967). Human Nutrition and Dietetics.
         Edinburgh.
      32 Polunin, I. (i960). The effects of shifting agriculture on human health and
         disease, Symposium on the impact of man on humid tropics vegetation.
         UNESCO Science Co-operation Office for S.E. Asia, Goroka, Territory of
         Papua and New Guinea, pp. 388-93.
      33 Audy, J. R. and Harrison, J. L. (1951). A review of investigations on mite
         typhus in Burma and Malaya, 1945-50, Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg.,
         44, pp. 371-404.
      34 Lambrecht, F. L. (1964). Aspects of evolution and ecology of tsetse flies
         and trypanosomiasis in prehistoric African environment, J. Afr. Hist., 5.
         24 pp.
      35 Steele, J. H. (1962). Animal Disease and Human Health. Food and Agri¬
         culture Organization of the United Nations, Roma. Freedom from Hunger
         Campaign.
      36 Vaughan, V. (1923). Epidemiology and Public Health. London. 2, pp. 851—
         61.
      37 Morse, D., Brothwell, D. R. and Ucko, P. J. (1964). Tuberculosis in
         Ancient Egypt, Am. Rev. Resp. Dis., 90, pp. 524-41.
      38 Brothwell, D. R. (1965). The palaeopathology of the E.B.-M.B. and
         Middle Bronze Age remains from Jericho (1957-8 excavations), in
         Kenyon, K. M. Excavations at Jericho. II. London, pp. 685-93.
      39 Kelso, A. J. and Armelagos, G. (1963). Nutritional factors as selective
         agencies in the determination of ABO blood group frequencies, South¬
         western Lore, 29, pp. 44-8.
      40 Otten, C. M. (1967). On pestilence, diet, natural selection, and the
         distribution of microbial and human blood group antigens and anti¬
         bodies, Current Anthropology, 8, pp. 209-26.
      41 Shatin, R. (1967). The transition from food-gathering to food-production
         in evolution and disease, Vitalstoffe Zivilisationskrankheiten, 12, pp. 104-
         7-_
      42 Livingstone, F. B. (1962). Anthropological implications of the Sickle¬
         cell gene distribution in West Africa, in Ashley Montague, M. F. (ed.)
         Culture and the Evolution of Man. New York.
      43 Coon, C. S. (1959). Race and ecology in Man, Cold Spring Harbour
         Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 24, pp. 153-9.
      44 Dobyns, H. F. (1966). Estimating aboriginal American population,
         Current Anthropology, 7, pp. 395-449.
                                             Early dietary variation    545

45 Brues, A. (1959). The spearman and the archer—an essay on selection in
   body build, Amer. Anthrop., 61, pp. 457-61.
46 I am most grateful to Professor N. A. Barnicot, for comments pertinent to
   the final preparation of this paper. Miss Theya Molleson kindly hunted
   out certain references, and Mrs. Irene Copeland continued her secretarial
   support.
         JOHN YUDICIN

         Archaeology and the nutritionist


The domestication of plants and animals is concerned with man going into the
business of producing his food instead of hunting and gathering his food. The
nutritionist is interested in this for three practical reasons:
  1 The “ideal” diet. The first is that to know what man ate before he
invented agriculture is to know his diet during the millions of years during
which he adapted to a particular choice of foods. We may thus assume that
this choice represents something like his “ideal” diet, and might well form
the basis of the advice that the nutritionist is asked to give in formulating diets
for health.
  2 Diets and diseases of civilization. The second reason for the nutritionist’s
interest is that he needs to know what the pre-agricultural diet was in order to
ascertain the dietary changes produced by the introduction of agriculture. A
study of these changes may possibly then afford a clue as to the causes of
diseases that appear to be associated with civilization.
  3 Factors determining food choice. The third reason for wishing to know
what dietary changes followed man’s domestication of plants and animals is
that these may give clues as to the factors that determine man’s choice of
food. We are still not very knowledgeable as to why people eat some foods
and reject other foods, and a study of dietary changes with time can provide
useful pointers.
  We have a long way to go before we can answer all the questions I have just
raised. In the meantime, let me summarize my own views that relate to the
three general problems I have outlined1. Many of these views are no doubt
based on slender or non-existent evidence, or even on quite incorrect assump¬
tions.



         i The “ideal” diet

As I understand it, man and his immediate ancestors, emerging as a distinctive
species two million years ago and perhaps much longer, were hunters as well
as gatherers of food. Their diets contained an unknown but not insignificant
548   Part V Human nutrition      yudkin

proportion of animal foods. Being omnivorous, he was not so likely to suffer
from food shortages as those species that had very restricted diets. But it
does look as if, when conditions allowed, his diet contained quite a lot of meat
and in some circumstances also quite a lot of fish. It seems that he was not
nearly so fussy as we are today in the sorts of meat that he ate; he did not
insist on fillet steak, but polished off the liver, kidneys and the entrails with
relish. Nor was he averse from chewing the cartilage and soft bones, and
breaking open the bones for marrow.
  In terms of its major constituents, then, his diet when the hunting was good
was relatively rich in protein, reasonably rich in fat, and not very rich in
carbohydrate. It would be poorer in protein and fat, and richer in carbohy¬
drate especially starch, at those times when he was not very successful in
hunting or scavaging for food.
  It seems a reasonable assumption that the particular ecological niche in
which man found himself some 9000 years ago was one to which he had
become pretty well adapted, and that this adaptation included the foods that
he chose to eat. On this basis, the nutritionist would suggest that a diet that
contained a fairly high proportion of meat would be basically the diet most
suitable for human animals. This is supported by a consideration of recent
changes in diet. We know2 that once man began to produce his food rather
than hunt or gather it, his total food supplies increased and these were
mostly the high-yielding vegetable foods rich in starch. As a result, his
numbers grew and it soon became impossible for him to revert to the low-
yielding method of hunting and gathering. Thus, from some 9000 years ago
until the recent industrial revolution, agricultural man has in general been
unable to eat anything more than small quantities of meat. However, when
there is no limitation imposed by economic factors, or cultural factors such as
vegetarianism, people tend to have a diet that contains quite a high proportion
of meat.
  I have been talking about man’s food preferences. The fact is of course that,
if his preferred foods are not available, man can eat from a wide range of
animal and vegetable foods. One feature of man’s inherently omnivorous
habit, incidentally, is that it enabled him to live in a wide range of environ¬
ments, in which he found and later produced a very wide range of foods. It is
this factor more than any other that made it possible for man to inhabit
ultimately almost every corner of the world.
  A second point of interest is that the adoption of the largely vegetable diet
that followed the development of agriculture 8000 or so years ago was only
possible because man had much earlier learnt how to make and control fire.
Unless they are cooked, most of the cereal and root crops would have been
indigestible except in very small quantities; some like cassava would even
have been poisonous.
                                          Archaeology and the nutritionist    549



      2 Diet and diseases of civilization

If these considerations relating to man’s “ideal” diet are correct, we must
conclude that the present-day diets of the majority of mankind differ con¬
siderably from the ideal diet. The changes began only 9000 years ago3, at
most only one half of 1% of man’s existence as a distinct species—and it is
unlikely that he has become completely adapted to these changes.
  One dietary consequence of the introduction of agriculture was, as we saw,
a change in the proportion of the major constituents—a fall in the proportion
of protein and fat, and a rise in the proportion of carbohydrate. In addition,
cereals and especially root crops, as well as being relatively short in protein,
may in varying degrees also be short in some of the B vitamins. Thus, maize is
short of nicotinic acid which is needed to prevent pellagra; man learnt to mill
and polish rice thus reducing the content of thiamine which is needed to
prevent beri beri. Moreover, all cereals contain phytate, the consumption of
which conduces to rickets as it interferes with the absorption of calcium. To
this we may add the suggestion that the agricultural diet no doubt contains
less calcium than the pre-agricultural diet, in which man ate the soft bones of
•animals and fish.
   If, as I suggested earlier, it is reasonable to assume that nutritional disease
was rare during the two million years or more when man was consuming the
diet to which he had become adapted, we are entitled to say that widespread
nutritional diseases such as protein deficiency (the commonest nutritional
deficiency), beri-beri, pellagra, riboflavin deficiency and rickets stem largely
from the dietary change brought about by the neolithic revolution.
  As well as producing nutritional deficiency, the neolithic diet high in
carbohydrate is more likely to produce dental caries. It is widely believed that
dental caries began to be prevalent after man took to his carbohydrate-rich
agricultural diet4. As Brothwell5 says, however, there is still a great deal to be
done in order to determine, for example, the relationship between dental
caries and the adoption of diets based largely on animal breeding on the one
hand, or on cereal production on the other hand.
  A second direct consequence of the introduction of agriculture is, I believe,
due to the new foods themselves, rather than to the nutrients they contain.
What I am suggesting is that there is evidence that man is still not completely
adapted to the consumption of cereals or cows’ milk, two foods that were
consumed in very much smaller quantities if at all in preneolithic times. For
it is a fact that the commonest allergies found in the countries where there
have been most studies are allergies to wheat and to milk.
550     Part V Human nutrition     yudkin




       3 Factors determining food choice

There has been a great deal of research, and even more armchair discussion,
as to why people eat what they do. I believe that most of the theories are
inadequate in the light of what we know about nutritional requirements. My
own views are best set out in a series of propositions:

(a) The cells of all species of animals require the same chemical substances
      for their continuing life and function.
(ib) Many of these substances can be made from other substances, but there
      remain some forty or fifty that the animal needs to have provided for it in
      the forms in which it uses them. Different species require these in roughly
      the same proportion.
(c) In most species, all of these essential substances must be supplied by the
      diet, though there are some species in which a few of the essential sub¬
      stances may be supplied by microbial synthesis in the gut.
(d) Species vary very much in the foods that they consume. Some animals are
      almost entirely carnivorous, some herbivorous, some omnivorous. And
      within these groups, some species choose quite different diets from others,
      and some are much more restricted than others.
(e) But since all species require the same, or nearly the same, substances in
      their diets, and in roughly the same proportion, it follows that it cannot
      be the nutrient composition of the foods that determine that they shall or
      shall not be consumed by different species.

  These considerations lead to the suggestion that there are properties of
shape, colour, smell, taste and texture that cause a particular species to
choose particular foods. For these properties, I use the word palatability, in a
perhaps excessively wide sense. It is axiomatic that, during the course of
evolution, a developing species must have continued to choose foods that gave
it the required nutrients, but it chose foods within its own ecological niche
that had particular attributes of palatability for that species.
  As far as man is concerned, it appears that the foods that are most palatable
are of two sorts. The first are those with the texture, savoury taste and other
qualities of meat; the second are those with the smell and colour, and sweet,
acid and aromatic taste of fruits. It is possible too that he likes to intersperse
these with rather neutral foods such as seeds, shoots, leaves and roots, which
prevent the palate becoming excessively jaded with the strong tastes of the
other foods. If this is so, it would suggest that the diet that to developing
man was most attractive was a diet of meat, fruit and some roots, seeds and
leaves. These would have given him—as it were incidentally—all the protein,
vitamins, mineral elements and calories that he required. When he ate what he
liked, he ate what he needed.
  As I suggested earlier, this hypothesis that palatability is a major deter-
noble:     a “Peace” and “War” panels of the Standard of Ur (see p. 486).
           b   Copper chariot from Tell Agrab drawn by four onagers (see p.

               486)'                                                           ...        ,
{Both these illustrations are reproduced by courtesy of the Trustees of the British Museum)

                                                                                    Plate i
Plate ii




           Smith:   The forcible feeding of cranes (Tomb of Mereruka at Saqqara (Dyn. VI) (see p. 309).
                 <u
           <J 43
                 4—*
           w
                C+H
           o o
           o\
           w
           i—i    <L)
                  >
                  *h
           u 3
             r\ 00
           K^>
           IZ> .S
           <->  CJ
           OS
           d a
           Q &
           ri      O-i
           S «
            d H
            (L) HH
            ^ C/D
           rl u
           P-1     GO


           +-»^ OJ
                   C/3
                 fH
            o B
           's
            o 'S

           43 'O u
             O o
           • J3  cj
                03 ^
             <3 c3 Oh
             cj    cj


             £ -JL (N
             O      5-H   hH
           *rj -M
               <L) _T^
             d      03    O
             j J W)
             w ^          o3
            4-<     ..    CJ
            HH     HH *3
            HH*
            ^ ou
            ^   oj (L)
               l-H °
            CO
            dJ hU 4-»
                   3
            gfi.a
            S d t5
            ^ d C
              o  ^T3
              03
               i e s
             o3
            43 o -d
            Oh

              w
              o
              PS
              Q




Plate hi
Sturtevant: a      Plantation slaves preparing cassava bread in the Lesser
               Antilles about 1660. 5: Peeling manioc roots; 6: Pulping
               the roots with a rotary grater; 7: Pulping the roots with the
               old-style grater; 8: Grated pulp in bags in press; 9: Sifting
               flour; 10: Cooking cassava on griddle; 13: Cassava cakes
               drying. (From J. B. du Tertre (1667). Histoire generate des
               Antilles . . . , 2, facing p. 419) (see p. 182.)




Owen: b    Domestic ferret (from Gesner, C. (1551). Historiae Animalium)
           (see p. 492.)


Plate iv
Dixon:   a Gold hawk’s head from Hierakonpolis, Upper Egypt (from
           Schaefer, H. and Andrae, W. (1925). Die Kunst des Alten
           Orients. Berlin, pi. 234 top) (see p. 137.)
         b Chick peas (see p. 137).                       Plate v
Ryder: a   Sample of Scythian sheepskin from Pazirik in central Asia dated
           about 400 b.c.
           (from Ryder, M. L. (1964). Fleece evolution in domestic sheep, Nature,
           Lond. 204, pp. 555-9) (see p. 501)




Clutton-Brock: b        Canis spp. from the Jericho Tell.
                     (?) No. 0.6.21J. Pottery Neolithic. Right mandibular
                     ramus with large compacted teeth: young animal, (??)
                     No. D.5.3C. Pottery Neolithic. Lower left carnassial
                     tooth. Described byZeuner1 (???) No. M.15.10A. Proto-
                     neolithic. Anterior portion of left horizontal ramus of a
                     canid mandible: the bone is charred: the alveoli of the
                     premolar teeth are much displaced (see pp. 338, 340)
             1 Zeuner, F. E. (1963). A History of Domesticated Animals. London.

Plate vi
d
    brothwell: a   Palate of Rhodesian Man, showing severe caries; b and
               c X-rays of part of the cortical tissue of early femora from
               Jericho, showing marked differences in density; d faecal
               residue from a medieval English site, showing plant tissue and
               eggs of Trichuris sp., Ascaris sp. and Dicrocoeliwn dendriticum
               (X 200, preparation by courtesy of Dr. A. Pike) (see pp. 532,
               537. 539-)
                                                                  Plate vii
                                  CmS


Zohary : Cultivated and wild emmer and wild einkorn (see p. 49).




Plate viii
                                          Archaeology and the nutritionist    551


minant in an animal’s food choice, and that in man the most palatable foods
are meat and fruit, is supported by the dietary trends that occur when there
are no economic or other restrictions on man’s food choice. It is a basic
nutritional concept that increasing affluence in man is associated with an
increased consumption of the highly palatable meat and fruit, and a decreased
consumption of the less palatable cereals and roots.
  Finally, I would like to bring this story up to date, although we now have
to deal with recent history rather than prehistory. I have said that a major
revolution in man’s diet occurred when he invented agriculture, and this has
been the thesis of my paper so far. But a second revolution in man’s diet
occurred with the introduction of industrialization, and the development of
science and technology, some 200 years ago. This had two tremendous
effects on man’s food, with results that were I believe to some extent of
opposite effects on man’s nutritional health.
  The first effect was the development of methods of food production,
storage, preservation and distribution. This made much more food available
to the industrialized countries with their increasing wealth, and made it
available too entirely independently of geography and of season. As a result,
for the first time in the story of man or indeed of any species of animal, there
is now a small but significant proportion of the world’s human population
that can look forward to living their whole fives without ever really being
hungry. In this way, because of the availability of more food, and especially
more of the more nutritious foods like meat and fruit, the industrial revolution
could be expected to have produced nothing but an improvement in man’s
nutritional health.
  But in addition to this, science and technology have made it possible to
separate the two associated but distinct factors of palatabifity and nutrition. It
is no longer true that when you eat what you like, you eat what you need. It
will no doubt soon be possible to produce something that has the appearance,
smell, taste and texture of a grilled steak, but with neither protein nor
vitamins. More important, it is already possible to produce a drink that has
the appearance, smell and taste of fruit juice, but with no vitamin C nor any
other nutritional quality except the dubious qualities of sugar. Chiefly for
technological reasons, it happens that we can produce sugar very cheaply, and
with it make a very wide range of highly palatable foods and drinks. The effect
of this is to increase our sugar consumption from 4 lb. a year in the middle of
the eighteenth century to 120 lb. or more nowadays.
  I have elsewhere produced evidence that this very large consumption of
sugar plays a part in causing not only dental caries, but also obesity, diabetes,
peptic ulceration, some skin diseases, and above all coronary thrombosis6. I
might add here, as a final comment, that it was chiefly a consideration of pre¬
historic man’s diet with its content of animal fat that more than any other
single factor led me to dispute the widely held view that coronary thrombosis
might be caused by this dietary constituent.
19—OOP A A   *   *
552   Part V Human nutrition       yudkin


  The industrial revolution then has made available to a substantial number of
people, on the one hand a better range of nutritionally desirable foods than has
ever before been possible, and on the other hand nutritionally undesirable
foods that previously were consumed in much smaller quantities. For these
people, the result has been simultaneously the almost complete elimination of
nutritional deficiency disease, and the production in virtually epidemic form
of a range of diseases that were previously quite rare. “The malnutrition of
affluence” is more than a striking catch-phrase.



      Notes
      1 Yudkin, J. (1962). Nutrition in the affluent society, Mem.s and Procs.
        Manchester Lit. and Philos. Soc., 104; Yudkin, J. (1963). Nutrition and
        palatability with special reference to obesity, myocardial infarction, and
        other diseases of civilization. Lancet, I, p. 1335; Yudkin, J. (1964).
        Patterns and trends in carbohydrate consumption and their relation to
        disease, Proc. Nutr. Soc., 23, p. 149; Yudkin, J. (1967). Evolutionary and
        historical changes in dietary carbohydrates, Am.J. clin. Nutr., 20, p. 108.
      2 e.g. Flannery, K. V., this volume, pp. 73-100.
      3 As pointed out by Hawkes, J. G., this volume, pp. 17-29.
      4 Bibby, B. G. (1961). Cariogenicity of foods, J. Amer. med. Ass., 177, p.
        316.
      5 Brothwell, D. R., this volume, pp. 531-45.
      6 Yudkin, J. (1963). ibid.; Yudkin, J. (1964). Dietary fat and dietary sugar
        in relation to Ischaemic Heart Disease and Diabetes, Lancet, II, p. 4;
        Yudkin, J. (1964). Levels of dietary sucrose in patients with Occlusive
        Atherosclerotic Disease, Lancet, II, p. 6; Yudkin, J. (1967). Sugar and
        Coronary Thrombosis, New Scientist, 16th March; Yudkin, J. (1967).
        Why blame sugar ?, Chemistry and Industry, 2nd Sept.
Conclusion
      STUART PIGGOTT

      Conclusion


After a seminar of such complexity and concentration, an elaborate summing-
up would be virtually impossible to prepare. I shall therefore limit my
remarks to some aspects of early animal and plant domestication in a region
where I know the material at first hand, namely Europe. Ne supra crepidam
sutor judicaret: I will take Pliny’s advice and not look beyond my Danubian
shoe-last celt.
• Conventionally, within the ecological modification of the Three Ages
model of prehistory, the appearance of agricultural economies (in the widest
sense) is equated with the beginning of a phase (of something) known as
“neolithic”. I have put this in rather laboured terms to make what I think is as
valid point: “neolithic” is the verbalization of a mental construct designed, as
we are currently using it, to accommodate certain archaeological data in a
way in which they will appear to have significance when viewed in terms of a
more general model in which the determinants are changes in technology
and subsistence-economics in combination. It is not Lubbock’s original
“neolithic” of 1865, and hardly Childe’s of the 1930s; it will surely not be that
of the next generation of prehistorians, who may well have modified it beyond
recognition if indeed they find an intellectual necessity to retain it at all.
Much of our discussion has, in a sense, been either writing Notes Towards
the Definition of the Neolithic, or expressing doubts about its existence.
  It would seem to me that a significant difference is perceptible in the socio¬
economic changes inferred from archaeological evidence in this context in the
Near East, and those in Europe. The cardinal problems in Western Asia are
those of transition among indigenous societies; in Europe, those of the intro¬
duction and adoption of an already formed cultural complex in which the
domestication of animals and plants, if the decisive economic factor, was not
the total content of the new pattern. The European prehistorian has there¬
fore to consider the circumstances in which not only the techniques of
domestication were acquired or disseminated, but in which an alien culture
was accepted and adopted. The new social artifacts are expressed not only in
the modification of inert substances as tools (in the widest sense, in which a
stone or pottery bowl is a tool), nor in that of living organisms—domesticated
556   Conclusion   piggott


plants and animals—but also in the more subtle and more profound modifica¬
tions of belief and behaviour which would alter the very structure of society.
  Of the intrusive nature of the first agriculturally based economies in
Europe there seems on the present evidence little doubt. The absence of the
necessary potential cultigens and domesticates such as cereals or ovicaprids in
Europe as opposed to Western Asia is a commonplace, even if it has minor
exceptions; the archaeological evidence demonstrates the introduction of a
whole range of novelties in material culture in the earliest neolithic settle¬
ments. The fact that a secondary domestication of locally indigenous cattle or
pigs could, or did take place, does not alter the intrusive character of the
initial impact of the new group of closely knit cultural traditions reflected in
the archaeological evidence for village settlements on an economic basis of
mixed farming. It was not simply a process whereby hunting and gathering
peoples adopted the sporadic cultivation of plants in the manner of much of
the garden agriculture of the New World, nor the intermittent and partial
domestication such as takes place with reindeer-herding communities, nor the
idea of permanent settlements such as Lepenski Vir. The evidence from East
Europe brought forward by Dr. Tringham in her paper to this seminar, and
more directly in a study of the relationship of the latest Mesolithic to the
earliest Neolithic in South-east and Central Europe1, makes it clear that no
initial acculturation of indigenous hunting and gathering communities by
contact with those with agricultural economies can be detected. In other
words, we are dealing not with animal and plant domestication as a technical
increment adopted by cultures already established in East and Central
Europe, but with the introduction, maintenance and comparatively rapid
development and dissemination of a new and alien tradition, in a form
sufficiently cohesive and viable as not only to establish itself, but to make the
necessary adjustments which would allow of its pushing the initial domesti¬
cates beyond their natural climatic and geographical habitat, far to the West
and North of Europe.
  A few years ago I tentatively and briefly put forward a thesis that in
antiquity it might be thought possible to perceive two types of society
characterized respectively by their acceptance or rejection of circumstances
leading to technological change. With such change, which alone can be
documented by archaeological evidence, would go the accompanying social
phenomenon, susceptible to perception by history alone, of changes in
ideas, a flexibility rather than a rigidity of tradition, and a willingness to
think empirically and if need be unconventionally. For such societies,
developing such a character for themselves or welcoming the adoption of new
ideas from outside, I suggested the term innovating; for those opposed to
such disruptive processes within, or influences upon, their long established
economies, that of conserving2. I was subsequently encouraged in my belief
that such a distinction might have a certain validity by the discovery that the
same concept had in fact been demonstrated at length in a quite different
                                                              Conclusion   557

context, that of historical England before the Industrial Revolution, by
an American anthropologist, Professor Margaret Hodgen, a dozen years
earlier3.
  She examined the sociological assumptions which, “isolating technology
from its matrix in the economic or social system, endow it with irresistible
advance”, and characterizing these philosophies of history as the “darling
vice” of the nineteenth century, with roots in a long antecedent past of
simplistic evolutionary thinking, criticizes them for separating “the innovator
from his innovation ... the agent of change from the fact of change”. She
contrasts those communities which have been receptive of innovation with
those who have opposed it, and, summing up her detailed and precisely dated
sequence of technological change and development in an historic context,
notes how “the technologically new in England has emerged at particular
epochs in the historical past under definite geographical conditions and in
historical correlation with a fundamental break in custom, the intrusion of
strangers”.
   It seems to me that the concept of innovators and conservers may be as
usefully employed in thinking about the beginning of animal and plant
domestication, or the transmission of the new cultural complex once achieved,
as in historically documented situations. And perhaps it will not be out of
place here to suggest that another thesis demonstrated by Professor Hodgen
may be of value to us as prehistorians. She comments on the creation in pre¬
industrial England of centres or regions of technological adaptability and a
ready acceptance of change. She notes “not only the efficacy of new blood
in bringing about industrial changes, but the fertility of the old cultural
ground that had long before received enrichment from foreign craftsmen”,
areas in which “after long years of experience in accepting changes in tools,
an ancient rigidity of agricultural custom had been replaced by relative
cultural elasticity”, where “die obscure zeal of nameless pioneers linked with
the presence of alien craftsmen . . . had ‘broken the cake’ of custom”.
  May one of the secondary effects of the adoption of agricultural techniques
or their implantation in partibus by newcomers, have been not only the
dramatic circumstances of the emergence of literacy and civilization in
Western Asia, but the creation of areas far afield favourable to subsequent
technological innovadons of a quite different kind, such as the precocious
initiation and development of non-ferrous metallurgy in Eastern Europe?
And, although impossible to document by archaeological means, should not
the necessity of accepting new and changing mental concepts be reflected in a
corresponding enlargement and sophistication of language among these
innovating societies ?
  I have strayed from the primary matter of the seminar and must return.,
The papers submitted fall into two groups, those dealing widi methodology
and those with inferences from the data that sound methodology can alone
558   Conclusion   piggott


provide. More than one speaker dealt with the objective criteria our inter¬
disciplinary studies demand, and some very real problems were brought to
our notice. It is perhaps worth while enlarging on one aspect whereby an
element of uncertainty is introduced into our interpretations: it was touched
on more than once but will bear re-statement. Our basic evidence for early
agriculture is provided by animal and plant remains in archaeological con¬
texts, as organic artifacts side-by-side with the products of material culture
in inert substances. Now in settlements or in burials we are dealing with
socially determined situations—Childe’s “fossilized behaviour”—and as
archaeologists we should recognize that in these contexts we are not dealing
with random assemblages representative of the whole nutritional spectrum of
omnivorous man, but with part of the material evidence for human
behaviour.
  This is of course patently obvious in the case of evidence from burials:
what goes into a grave is subject to selection not only in terms of the range of
objects available within a given culture, but in terms of religious and there¬
fore social approval. Ignorant of the religion, and informed only inferentially
of the social structure of a prehistoric community, the choice may seem to us
meaningless or even capricious. I would remind you in passing that the
archaeological phrase “grave-goods” itself conceals an unverifiable assump¬
tion as to motive and purpose, rather than demonstrates an inference. But
whatever the irrecoverable reasons for the placing of objects in a grave, their
presence is far from being the product of chance. They have been selected
according to conventions of which we are ignorant, and this limitation of
choice will operate on food remains as much as for pots or weapons, clothing
or ornaments. We cannot take them as representing the whole nutritional
potential of the culture of which they are a part.
  It is perhaps less often realized that this may apply to settlement debris as
well. But food refuse is the product of meals, and cooking, eating and drinking
are essentially social activities with complex rules, conventions, tabus and
prohibitions unrelated to nutrition as such. Religious dictates take no account
of a nice balance of proteins and carbohydrates; Custom, not Calory is King.
The Jewish and Muslim prohibition of pork is an obvious example, but what
for that matter are we to make of the statement in Pausanias that, in the
gross pork-eating Celtic world, it was tabu in Galatian Pesinus ? There were
Celtic tabus against fish: these and their modern counterparts may be related
to allergies, but throughout prehistory there must have been innumerable
irrational restrictions on diet comparable with those so abundantly docu¬
mented in recent ethnography. Certain parts of animals may be accepted as
food, others rejected: we need look no further than our own society to be
reminded for instance of ambivalent attitudes towards what we uncompro¬
misingly call Offal, and American cook-books more delicately designate
Variety Meats.
  The more advanced modes of cooking which became at first necessary and
                                                                   Conclusion    559


later desirable in the preparation of the diet available to the first agricul¬
turalists inevitably affected material culture, and the development of pottery¬
making techniques must have a primary relationship to the preparation,
storage and service of forms of food and drink not hitherto exploited.
Archaeologists on occasion get hooked on pots and take ceramic trips, forget¬
ting that one should not rate the container above the contents, the stew-pot
over the stew. Food and drink may be perishable imponderables beyond
reach of even inferential recovery, but non-nutritional problems may be
illuminated in terms of cooking processes, as Rausing has recently suggested
in the instance of the composite archer’s bow which needs animal glue and
prepared sinew which cannot be made except by prolonged boiling in a vessel
of pottery or metal. From this essentially culinary fact he argues that the
invention and development of this type of bow can only have taken place
among peoples employing such means of food production, rather than in the
aceramic contexts of most hunters and gatherers4.
   The last point I wish to make is that enshrined in a cliche so many of us
have turned to when setting examination papers on neolithic Europe. Ex
oriente lux, or le mirage orientale ? An antithesis on paper, has it any solution
. in practice ? It is in miniature (and perhaps on a larger scale than that) a
crucial test of the diffusionist model of the relationship between the earliest
agriculture in Asia and Europe, and our seminar has suggested that the light
from the east is not an illusion, but may even be a fairly coherent beam. The
desire to believe it was a mirage led Salomon Reinach to support the fantastic
cause of the Glozel forgeries in the 1920s, and so to find pre-literate literacy
in neolithic France. If we are spared such excesses today, do not let us con¬
gratulate ourselves too rapidly before remembering the emotive attempts of
 more than European people of late to discover an indigenous origin for
 agriculture within their own territories, and the keen competition for a
 national aceramic neolithic; the Tartaria tablets and their interpretation form
 a problem quite as interesting to students of human psychology as to pre¬
 historians. But despite the nonsense, one thing does seem to stand up to the
 assaults of reasoned scholarship. With perhaps minor exceptions, Europe
 appears still to maintain its indebtedness for the initiation of agriculture to
 peoples, crops and herds from the lands across the Hellespont and beyond
 the Aegean. It is an old debt, standing now for some seven or eight thousand
years.



         Notes
         1 Tringham, R. (1968). A preliminary study of the early neolithic and latest
           mesolithic blade industries in southeast and central Europe, in Coles,
           J. M. and Simpson, D. D. A. (eds.) Studies in Ancient Europe. Leicester,
           pp. 45-70.
560   Conclusion   piggott


      2 Piggott, S. (1965). Ancient Europe: from the Beginnings of Agriculture to
        Classical Antiquity. Edinburgh and Chicago.
      3 Hodgen, M. T. (1952). Change and History: a Study of Dated Distribution
        of Technological Innovations in England. Viking Fund Pubs, in Anthro¬
        pology, 18, New York.
      4 Rausing, G. (1967). The Bow: Some Notes on its Origin and Development.
        Lund & Bonn. pp. 145 ff.
      INDEX

      General

Aardvark 311                                 Apocynaceae 17
Abalone (see also Mollusc) 480, 482          Apodemus sylvaticus (see also Mouse) 211
Abies cilicica (see also Fir) 38             Apple (see also Malus) 201, 205
Acacia 103                                     Crab 201-6
Acetobacter 466                              Arab 250, 485
Ackee 179                                    Arachis (see also Groundnut, Peanut)
Acorn (see also Oak, Quercus) 78-9, 205,          427-41
     366-7                                     africana 429
Adansonia digitata (see also Baobab) 331-5     asiatica 429, 433, 437
Addax (see also Antelope) 309, 312            fastigiata 431
Aegilops (see also Wheat) 56, 61, 64, 82,      hypogaea 179, 400, 427-41
     88-90, 145, 152, 155-7, 162-3             monticola 428
  cylindrica 64                                nambyquarae 432
  longissima 64                                pusilla 427
  speltoides 64, 162                           villosa 428
  squarrosa 60-3, 65, 163, 174, 176            villosulicarpa 432
  triuncialis 64                               vulgaris 431
  variabilis 64                              Arawak 178, 185, 422, 436-7
Ahaggar Tuareg (see Tuareg)                  Arracacha (see also Arracacia) 10, 23
Akkadian 488                                 Arracacia (see also Arracacha) 23
Alcelaphus 105                                 xanthorrhiza xo
Aloes aloes (see also Deer) 102, 390         Arrowroot (see also Canna, Maranta) 10,
Alder (see also Alnus) 113                        178, 184-9, 406
Allium (see also Onion) 356-8                  Fiji (see also Tacca) 10
Allouia (see also Calathea, Lleren) 10       Artemisia (see also Sagebrush) xix, 77, 112
Almond (see also Prunus) 38, 84, 86, 90        herba-alba 38, 40
Alnus (see also Alder) 112-13                Aryan 473
Alpaca 254, 366                              Asclepiadaceae 17
Amalaka (see also Myrobalan, Phyllanthus)    Aspergillus 466
     326                                     Ass 102, 471-2, 485
Amanita 466                                  Assyrian 485
Amaranth 447                                 Astragalus (see also Vetch) 82, 88, 155
Amber canes (see also Sorghum) 400           Asturian 480
Ammotragus (see also Sheep) 372              Aurochs (see also Bos, Cattle) 83-4, 86, 95,
Amorphophallus campanulatus 406                   222, 224-5, 227, 277-94
‘Amuq’ 150-1, 154; *57; 166, 168, 374-5      Australian Aborigine xviii
