                                   Preface


Just south of Samarkand, in the mountainous southeast corner of Uzbekistan
there is a small cave, the cave of Teshik Tash. The name means 'stone with an
opening', and it was here in this remote region of Central Asia that the remains
of the skeleton of a child were excavated by archaeologists more than 50 years
ago. They were immediately recognized as the bones of a Neanderthal.
  Caves such as Teshik Tash are indeed stones with openings. Their contents
provide us with a window to the past, to another world where the people were
physically different from ourselves, and survived for tens of thousands of years
without many of the aspects of culture - such as art and perhaps even language
- that we often regard as essential elements of our common humanity.
  In this book we will examine these remarkable people, the Neanderthals.
Remarkable because they seem so like us in many ways, yet different in as many
others. Remarkable because no other people in prehistory has received so much
attention, either by being turned into figures of fun, such as half-witted club-
wielding cavemen, or by being       vilified.   'They had   all   the manners of a
Neanderthal' is akin to labelling someone's behaviour as that of a wild animal.
Currently, the scientific disciplines that have been piecing together the
evidence for the Neanderthals are locked in a fierce debate. The issue revolves
around the Neanderthals' place in our ancestry. Quite simply, are they insiders
or outsiders? Close kin or distant relatives?
  It has taken two of us to write this book because the evidence is of two general

types: biological, ranging   from anatomy - derived from fossils - to recent
genetic data; and behavioural, the record of past life-styles contained in the
archaeological record.
  On current evidence, the Neanderthals lived between about 230,000 and
30,000 years ago - a huge span of time by any reckoning. Their world was
confined to Eurasia, stretching from the mountains of Uzbekistan in the east to
the Iberian plateau in the west (fig. 1). To the south, the boundary runs along
the northern shores of the Mediterranean and goes no further south than the
gates of Jerusalem. The northern limits of their territory have been blurred by
the successive advances and retreats of Ice Age glaciers that have obliterated
nearly   all   the traces of Neanderthal settlement.   Such traces would have
included skeletons and stone tools, camps and caves. Just occasionally a
remnant is found, for example in north Wales, but such discoveries are rare.
  The Neanderthals were not isolated. They were not the only human
populations present in the world during that 200,000-year epoch. They were
surrounded to the south in Africa and to the east in Asia by other closely related
but physically distinct populations. The New World lay undiscovered and
unpopulated. All these peoples made their stone tools in a comparable manner
PREFACE



          and to similar patterns. The way they used the landscape and its resources was
          conditioned by the kinds of plants and animals available in any one region. For
          simplicity,  we will refer to the Neanderthals and their anatomically pre-
          modern neighbours as the Ancients. Their anatomically modern successors -
          known in Europe as the Cro-Magnons, after the site of their first discovery - we
          shall designate the Moderns. We now know that for some considerable time the

          Moderns coexisted with the Ancients. It is even likely that for many thousands
          of years physical differences meant nothing when it came to the art of survival,
          the use of technology and the organization of society. It seems that the Moderns
          - people like us - literally behaved like Neanderthals for very long periods of
          time indeed. Why and how we changed is bound up with the Neanderthals'
          fate.

             The remoteness of Teshik Tash today also reminds us of the antiquity of the
          evidence it contains. When we are familiar only with the few decades of our own
          existence, and perhaps with the hundreds or few thousand years of written
          history, how can we begin to contemplate the tens of thousands of years that the
          Neanderthals lived on planet Earth? It may help to substitute distance for time.
          In these days of air travel the world has shrunk and the idea of 'one thousand
          leagues and more' no longer sends us reeling as it would have done our medieval
          ancestors. Let us see how this substitution helps. To accomplish a journey from
          Teshik Tash to London, a distance of some 5,000 km, would on the 200,000-
          year Neanderthal timescale be immensely slow, about          1   km every 40 years.
          After 50,000 years we would only have reached Astrakhan on the shores of the
          Caspian Sea, and after 100,000 years the Ukrainian capital of Kiev. Continuing
          at the same snail's pace, it would take us another 100,000 years to reach western

          Europe where the last Neanderthals are found.
             A glance at the Neanderthal world (fig. 1) reveals a size and shape that is
          reminiscent of the so-called civilized world of Classical Greece and Rome. The
          comparison is not trivial. In the first place, one of the continuing interests in the
          Neanderthals is the opportunity they provide for the examination of Europe
          and its peoples. Just as the contribution of Greece and Rome to modern
          civilization has been minutely picked over by scholars and commentators, so

          too with the Neanderthals and their relation to us. Secondly, these ancient folk
          are so bound up with questions of identity and heritage, breeding and potential
          that scientific observation is even less likely than normal to be able to divorce
          itself   from present contemporary opinions.         Forget claims of      scientific

          objectivity.   We inherited many of these opinions from the Classical world. One
          in particular stands out: Aristotle's   concept of a natural slave. His working
          definition that guided Athenian society can be summarized as follows: 'Ideally
          the natural slave should always be equipped with a powerful body capable of
          performing the labours nature has assigned to him. He should always be a
          slouching beast of great physical strength, while the natural master, in keeping
          with his superior powers of reason, should be both delicate and well
                           1
          proportioned.'
             Here is a distinction that scientists would flesh out 2,000 years later with the
                                                                                       PREFACE



bones of Neanderthal and Cro-Magnon peoples. This is the heart of the debate
about the origins of modern humans. We have to ask: what role did nature have
in   shaping adaptations, both physical and behavioural?       What curtain of
intellect, ability and appearance separates the primitive from the advanced, the

savage from the civilized? What do we mean by these terms and how can a study
of the past assist us in our quest for self-knowledge? To what extent do we still
attempt to create and relate to the very ancient past by furnishing it with the
                                                                   2
familiar faces of social and ethnic categories from our present?
     The Neanderthal world is therefore very much our world. We deliberately
stress this at the outset since the route to understanding the Neanderthals need

not be hedged around by difficulties such as huge timespans, complicated
terminology and the arcane procedures of stone tool typology. Strip these away,
or at least try to understand them, enter that 'stone with an opening', and an
opportunity emerges to undertake a sociological analysis that          is   normally
regarded only as the preserve of the imagination.
     A TLANTIC             OCEAN




                                                          El Castillo

                                                                Cueva Morin'
                                                                •Atapuerca




                                                         IBERIA
                          I     /vilas Ruivas

                          \

                           \
                               Vv          \        Forbes' Quarry

                                      N*    I       & Devil's Towei




                                )ar-es-Soltan

                    '
                        •Jebel Irhoud




                                                                               NORTH AFRICA




                                                            Chatelperron
                         FRANCE

          Cesaire
                        Fontechevade
          a Chaise*                             La Chapelle-aux-Saints
         La Quma
          N\   LeMoustier J     ^   e9° urdou   /
           La Micoque         •» Pech-de-iAze
          LaTerrassie ^^-*>o-Magnon
           Grotte Vautrey       "        AtaBorde




                                                                                                       500 Mis
                                                                                          -    1        I




          Montmaunn •                                                                         500 Km




10
                              ^40°                                                                 |    \60°

»

                          ^ Late Pleistocene                                                      3 Middle Pleistocene                            /                                             ^r\
    £>                        /   glacial maximum                                                       glacial maximum                      s^
                                                                                                 ^f                                                                                         it



J        J
                                                                                                                                '*
                                                                                                                        \

"""***
         "^

                                                                                                                                -"VV^^"                                                         N
                                                                                                                                    ^\            V
                                                                                                                                                                                Karatau & Lakhuti \

                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                        \                           TeshikTashA



                Kiik-KobalA/-^
                Staroselyev/
                                        ^^*nA
                                                    >«~^                    «Kudaro         >v     4"               o
                                                                                                               ^ jv *
                                                                                                                                         \
                                                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                           \
                                                                                                                                                          **v_
                                                                                                                                                                ~^~^            —'i             /
                                                                                                                                                                                                        '




                                                                                                                                             \                                              /
               BLACK SEA                            \
                                                             J
                                                                           • Dmanisi             ^^p      ~*     v7 b                         \                                         '

                                                                                                                        \                         \                                 /

^                                                                    Shanidarf         V*
                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                        ^
                                                                                                                                                  \
                                                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                           \
                                                                                                                                                            \       /
                                                                                                                                                                        /
                                                                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                                                                                                /
                                                                                                                                                                                  '




                                                                                                                                                                        ^^"^
JP                       &               \
                                         J Yabrud

                                   Qafzeh^ Amud & Zuttiyeh
                                       ^Skhui & Tabun
                                                           X \

                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                IRAN

                                                                                                                                             /^^ \
                                                                                                                                                      y         \




*   —-                                 ^Kebara

                                                                                                                        s           /                                       \




    EGYPT                                                              \               SAUDI ARABIA
                                   1       \ o\
                                                                                                                                                                            /v J          \



              Wadi Haifa Jy
                                                     ^                                                                      Q       J Boundary of the Neanderthal world
                                                                                                                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                                                A       Supposed Neanderthal burials




                 /   The Neanderthal world, showing the key sites discussed in the text and the extent of the ice
                 sheets across Europe during the middle and late Pleistocene.


                                                                                                                                                                                                    II
                                  CHAPTER             1




               Who Were the Neanderthals?

Introduction

Until the mid-nineteenth century, the quest for human origins began and
ended - at least for the Western world - in the Garden of Eden. In Biblical
terms, God created Adam and Eve as fully human, indeed perfect, beings.
There was no semi-human, pre-Adam stage: how could there be when the
perfect couple had been brought into existence at the creation of the world,
which itself had taken place by some reckonings only in 4004 bc? Then, over a
century and a half ago, geologists began to argue that the world was much,
much older than this, and Charles Darwin subsequently put forward the theory
of evolution. If animals had evolved from some 'primitive' earlier state, surely
human beings had done so as well? Darwin himself believed that we should look
to Africa to find the ultimate cradle of humanity.
  Research over the last 40 years has proved Darwin right. Thanks to intensive
fieldwork we now know that the very first upright-walking, tool-using creatures
whom we can classify as members of the genus Homo lived in Africa south of the
Sahara over 2 million years ago. Together with his wife Mary, Louis Leakey,
pioneer discoverer of our African ancestors, christened these creatures Homo
habilis ('handy man'). Other even older upright-walking species, possibly tool-

users as well, have been found in southern and eastern Africa - hence their
genus name Australopithecus: 'southern ape', although they are not strictly
speaking 'apes' like chimpanzees.         The australopithecines {A. Africanus, A.
afarensis, A. robustus, to name their principal constituent species) are grouped
by scientists with the genus Homo into the Hominidae or hominid family. Quite
what role - if any - the australopithecines played in human evolution is
currently much debated, but there is no doubt that some of them coexisted not
only with Homo habilis but also with the successor species, Homo erectus, before
becoming extinct.
  Homo erectus emerged around      1 .7   million years ago in Africa and by 1 million
years ago was the only surviving hominid species on earth. It is at this point that
we   pick   up the   narrative,   for     it    was Homo    erectus   (once   known        as
Pithecanthropus or 'apeman') who first migrated out of Africa. Fossil finds of
this species have come from Georgia, Java and China, while stone tools thought

to be their trademark have been discovered scattered across Africa and Europe.

The subsequent story of these Ancients, particularly the Neanderthals of
Eurasia after 230,000 years ago,        is     the subject of this book. At issue     is   a

fundamental question for evolutionary studies: to what extent did various
populations of Ancients such as the Neanderthals contribute to the evident
physical and cultural diversity of anatomically modern humans? Put another
                                                                    WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


way: where did the Moderns, among whom we number ourselves, come from,
and when and how?
  As we shall see, today there are two main competing scientific camps, each
believing it holds the solution. Both accept that there was a migration out of
Africa by Homo erectus populations beginning around i million years ago ('Out
of Africa i' as we shall call it). One camp, however, argues that there was at least
one other major wave of migration ('Out of Africa 2') around 100,000 years ago,
this time of anatomically modern humans - Homo sapiens - people who had

evolved in Africa from Homo erectus stock and subsequently replaced all other
populations in the world including the Neanderthals. Against this model of
population replacement, the rival camp sets its model of regional continuity For
                                                                              .




the followers of this latter school, there was no pronounced Out of Africa 2
migration. Instead, modern humans evolved semi-independently in different
regions of the world from independent populations of Ancients (Neanderthals
in Eurasia,   Homo erectus in China and Java), with continual gene flow or
interbreeding between geographically contiguous groups so that a single but
racially diverse modern human species was the result.

  It   becomes clear that the Neanderthals - for whom we have a wealth of
evidence greater than for any of our other fossil relatives - are central to this
argument. Did they evolve into people like us, as the multiregionalists would
have us believe, or were they an evolutionary dead end, as the proponents of
population replacement would argue?
  The first step towards an answer is to ask why, almost 1 50 years after they
were first identified, the Neanderthals still occupy so much space in scientific
debates between palaeoanthropologists?       And why have they stuck in the
popular imagination as the archetypal cave-dwellers, surrounded by prehis-
toric beasts of varying authenticity? There is obviously more to Neanderthals

than their fossil remains and the associated archaeological evidence of chipped
stones and broken animal bones.    We begin therefore with the known history of
their discovery.



Discovering Neanderthals

Neanderthals hold a special place in the story of the unearthing of our fossil
ancestors. The 1856 discovery of a partial skeleton in the Feldhofer Cave in the
Neander Valley (Neanderthal in German) near Dusseldorf, marked the real
beginning of paleoanthropology as a separate field of study. Although related
                                                                1




finds had already been made at Engis in Belgium (a child's skull in 1830) and at
Forbes' Quarry in Gibraltar (a woman's skull in 1848), their significance was
not recognized until long after the Neander Valley discovery had been
described and discussed by various authorities. While numerous scholars early
on regarded the Neanderthal skeleton as representing an ancient European
race, it was an Irish anatomist, William King, who in 1864 took the major step
of identifying the find as the type of a       new species of humanity, Homo
neanderthalensis. Further discoveries before the First World War from sites in




                                                                                            13
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS!




                 2   The first identified Neanderthal skull,
                 excavated in the Neander Valley, Germany in
                 1856. The drawing shown here was published in
                 Thomas Huxley's famous i86j volume, Man's
                 Place in Nature, in which he expounded his
                 theory of human evolution.




                 Belgium, Croatia and France (see table below) were quickly recognized as
                 representatives of this         same fossil group. Some scholars were prepared to
                 regard these finds as potential ancestors for modern Europeans, but most
                 considered them too primitive or too specialized to be closely related to living
                 humans, particularly the supposedly highly advanced white European race.
                 Others, such as Rudolf Virchow, even regarded the Neanderthals as diseased or
                 degenerate, a view which has occasionally been revived, but with little success.
                     As the table shows, further discoveries of Neanderthals took place between
                 the two world wars. The most important were made at the Mount Carmel caves



           THE FIRST PHASE, 1914 AND BEFORE                                 THE SECOND PHASE, 1920-39
         Belgium                                                   Crimea
         Engis                                          1830       Kiik Koba                        1924-26
         Gibraltar                                                 Israel
         Forbes' Quarry                                 1848       Mount Carmel, TabOn cave             1929
         Germany                                                   Italy
         Neander Valley                                 1856       Saccopastore                     1929-35
                                                                   Guattari                            1939
         Belgium
         Spy Caves                                      1886       Central Asia
         Croatia                                                   Teshik Tash                          1938
          Krapina
         Germany
          Ehringsdorf                                   1908
          France
          Le Moustier 1                                 1908
          La Chapelle-aux-Saints                        1908
          La Ferrassie 1                                1909
          La Ferrassie 2                                1910
          La Quina                                      1911
          La Ferrassie 3 & 4                            1912
          Le Moustier 2                                 1914


                                    3   The first major discoveries of Neanderthal remains.




14
                                                                  WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


outside Haifa, by Dorothy Garrod and her team; in the Crimea by G. A. Bonch-
Osmolovsky; and in Central Asia by A. P. Okladnikov. These finds set what still
remain the geographical limits for the distinctive Neanderthal fossils (fig. i):
despite certain previous claims, Neanderthals proper are not found in Africa,
India or any part of eastern Asia south of the great mountain chains.    We shall
see in later chapters how the last 50 years have witnessed several important
discoveries in Europe,     Iraq and Israel and a greater precision to their
chronology.
      Since the Feldhofer find in 1856 archaeologists have turned up numerous
Neanderthal skeletons, a few reasonably complete but most reduced to small
remnants. 2 In addition, many other fragments of skulls, jaws and teeth have
been found. Of the known skeletons nearly half are from children. Several sites
- La Ferrassie and La Quina (France), Shanidar (Iraq) and Krapina (Croatia) -
have produced quite reasonable samples of either skeletons or skull and dental
fragments. The remains probably represent something less than 500 indivi-
duals in total - seemingly little to show for perhaps 200,000 years of human
evolution. Several hundred thousand stone tools from the same period seems
rather better, although most of these are not directly associated with the fossil
remains. However, in a subject often dependent upon small and incomplete
scraps of evidence, a total of 500 individuals is a respectable sample and makes
the Neanderthals attractive for the geographical study of fossil populations at
both the local and regional level, and for biological and cultural comparisons by
age and sex.
   There is one Neanderthal who, for historical reasons, is more important than
all the rest. This is the so-called 'old man' from La Chapelle-aux-Saints in
southwest France, found in 1908. We learn from his history that Neanderthals
are what we make them. In order to understand his significance, we must look
briefly at the career of one of the great archaeologists of the nineteenth century,
Gabriel de Mortillet (1821-98). This French polymath made numerous attacks
in his youth on the church, state and bourgeoisie, which led to a self-imposed

exile from France between 1849 an^ 1864 to escape a prison sentence. A
champion of evolution governed by progressive laws, de Mortillet proposed
that the Neanderthals did have a place in our ancestry. He was one of the first to
show that one could place fossils and their associated stone tools in a
chronological sequence, oldest to youngest. 3
      As more discoveries were made,     it   became possible to argue that the
Neanderthal skulls from Gibraltar, the Neander Valley and Spy fell neatly into
chronological position between the skull cap from Java, today recognized as
Homo erectus, found by Eugene Dubois in 1891, and the entirely modern-
looking skulls that had been dug up in the          Cro-Magnon rockshelter in
southwest France in 1868. De Mortillet's death just before the flurry of finds in
the early years of this century (see table above) presaged an opportunity to bury
his ideas with him.




                                                                                          15
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?




               4 Marcellin Boule assigned the Neanderthals to a different species from our own primarily on
              the basis of their skull morphology. Here he compares the facial bones of the Chapelle-aux-Saints
                   Neanderthal (centre) with those of a chimpanzee on the left and a modern Frenchman
                                                        on the right.




              Boule's Neanderthal

              In 1908 three French clerics - the Abbes Jean and Amedee Bouyssonie and the
              Abbe Bardon - discovered the nearly complete skeleton of a Neanderthal at the
              small cave of La Chapelle-aux-Saints, in the Correze district of France. On the
              advice of another priest, the Abbe Breuil (soon to be the doyen of French
              prehistory), the skeleton was sent for study not to de Mortillet's successors at
              the Ecole d'Anthropologie - firm believers in a Neanderthal phase of our
              ancestry - but to Marcellin Boule, at the Museum of Natural History in Paris.
              Boule and his associates did not recognize an earlier, Neanderthal phase in
              human ancestry. The stage was set for a major reinterpretation, and Boule did
              not disappoint.
                After a preliminary account, delivered only a few months after the Abbes'
              discovery, Boule's exhaustive study of the skull and skeleton appeared
              promptly in three monographs of the Annales de Paleontologie published
              between October 191 1 and March 1913. 4 The work set new standards for
              describing and reporting human fossils, and its conclusions dominated human
              evolutionary studies up to and just beyond Boule's death in 1942. We shall deal
              with his conclusions in more detail in later chapters but it is worth noting the
              main points here. In the first place, like William King, Boule classified the
              skeleton as a separate species - Homo neanderthalensis - rather than as a sub-
              species of Homo sapiens, our own species. His reasons for doing this were
              various but depended largely on his assessment that the skull lay outside the
              variation that might reasonably be expected for a local variety of Homo sapiens.
              His comparison of the skulls of a chimpanzee, the Chapelle-aux-Saints
              Neanderthal and a modern Frenchman (fig. 4) served his point well. His use of
              the scientific name first put forward by King established a separate branch
              rather than a lineal ancestor.




16
i   The discovery of these bones in 1856 in the Neander Valley near Dusseldorf, Germany,
triggered one of the fiercest debates in scientific history: were the people represented by
these fossil remains our direct ancestors or were they evolutionary dead-ends?
2,3   Two reconstructions of the same
skeleton which illustrate how widely
interpretations of the Neanderthals can
differ.   {Below) The image which expelled
the Neanderthals from human ancestry,
depicting an ape-like, hairy creature.
Based on Marcellin Boule's scientific
study of the Chapelle-aux-Saints
skeleton, and apparently approved by
him, this reconstruction was widely
published in France and England in
1909, shortly after the discovery at La
Chapelle-aux-Saints. {Left) Neanderthals
as close kin. The respected anatomist Sir
Arthur Keith commissioned this very
sympathetic reconstruction of the
Chapelle-aux-Saints remains in 191 1.
Note that a few of the archaeological
details are wrong: for instance, no
ornaments or necklaces have been found
with Neanderthal fossils. Interestingly,
Keith later rejected the implications of
this image; following the discoveries at
Piltdown (now known to be fraudulent),
he joined the camp which expelled the
Neanderthals from our ancestrv.
                                                   ^
Changing images of the Neanderthals




4 A 191 5 picture of Neanderthal life,
supervised by the American
palaeontologist Henry Fairfield Osborn.
Although it claims scientific accuracy, the
illustration clearly relies on traditional
artistic conventions to depict
primitiveness: wielding clubs and nearly
naked, the Neanderthals are slouched
and bent-kneed.




5 {Below) In 1905 the Cambridge
anatomist W.L.H. Duckworth supervised
BucknalFs vision of Old Stone Age life
that illustrated Henry Knipe's poem
'Nebula to Man'. These lines
accompanied the picture:
Primeval men arc now upon the scene,
short, thick-boned hairy beings of savage mien,
with ape-like skulls; but yet endowed with pride
and power of mind to lower brutes denied.

As the picture and the poem both
propose, evolution will be in an upward,
progressive direction.                                 ^ ?V   <*&,
Reconstructing the Neanderthals
Many attempts have been made to overlie muscles and
skin on Neanderthal skulls and to reconstruct the form
of the face, and these frequently reflect changing views
on human evolution.


FACING PAGE

6—8 (Above left) Mikhail Gerasimov devoted a life time
to the creation of life-like portraits from hominid
skulls. Here is his representation of the 'Old Man' of
La-Chapelle-aux-Saints. Compare it with other
reconstructions of the same skull: plates 9 and 10.
(Above right) Gerasimov's 1940s reconstruction of the
youth from Le Moustier. (Left) Zdenek Burian's
portrait of a Neanderthal male probably gives a good
facial likeness,   but the figure is too dark and hirsute.


THIS PAGE

9,10 (Above left) Heberer's view of the 'Old Man' of
La Chapelle-aux-Saints. (Above) Bust of the Chapelle-
aux-Saints Neanderthal, with its musculature exposed,
sculpted under the supervision of Marcellin Boule.

1 1   (Left) Constructed at much the same time as
Boule's model, this life-size figure of a Neanderthal
male was exhibited in a Chicago museum. It fleshes
out many popular misconceptions about the
Neanderthals, portraying this character as a hairy,
apish brute.
A recent view of the Neanderthals
Over the last few decades, attempts have been
made to humanize portraits of the Neanderthals,
to bring artistic representations into line with
current scientific thought. This model of a
Neanderthal family constructed for a touring
exhibition, 'The Human Story', emphasizes some
recent changes in attitude.

12-14 {Above, left and right) A Neanderthal
woman. (Right) Overall view of the exhibit.
Although these figures have far less body hair
than earlier depictions, in certain other respects
this reconstruction promulgates traditional
gender-specific ideas about the Neanderthals.
1 5, 1 6 (Above and right) This depiction of a male
                                                    -
which suggests the humanity, even modernity, of the
Neanderthals - represents Neanderthal men as the
active, tool-bearing members of the population.
                                                                                                R>

17,18 .Maurice Wilson's comparison of a Neanderthal and an anatomically modern Cro-Magnon.
The Neanderthal male has an appropriately stocky build, with shorter, stronger limbs than his
more modern successor.
                                                                           WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


   From that starting point the evidence for differences, both qualitative and
quantitative, was piled up.             A cast of the inside of the skull (an endocast) was
revealed to have a 'coarse' appearance, with the imprints of the brain
convolutions showing a general simplicity of design. 5 Boule and his colleagues
wrote that these indicated 'rudimentary intellectual faculties.               The relative
development of different parts of the grey matter testify to this fact.' 6 Even the
relatively large size of the Chapelle-aux-Saints brain was used to support the
view that large heads are not always the best heads. After all, the brain of their
countryman, the eminent philosopher Anatole France, was only two-thirds the
                                                                                     7
size of the average male Neanderthal and smaller even than the female!

   Boule then proceeded to put this low intelligence, imprisoned behind bars of
brow-ridge bone under a low dome, onto a stooped and rigid skeleton. One of
the most frequently reproduced figures from his work (fig. 5) compares the
posture of the Chapelle-aux-Saints skeleton with that of an Australian
Aborigine. The significance of this comparison should not be lost: Boule would
have regarded the latter as an example of one of the so-called 'lowest races' and
hence by imputation closer to the apes and some notional human ancestor.
Many of his contemporaries believed that the Aborigines were en route to
extinction as civilization rapidly replaced their living prehistory. Boule used
the fact that the Neanderthal skeleton seemed so different from that of its
supposedly closest descendant to support the exclusion of the Neanderthals
from Homo sapiens. His summary of the Neanderthal skeleton was succinct:




5 Boule s famous comparison of the
Chapelle-aux-Saints skeleton with
that of a modern Australian
Aborigine. The difference between
the Neanderthal and the Aborigine
(thought by Boule to be one of the
most primitive of living peoples) was
judged so great that the
Neanderthal could not possibly
belong to Homo sapiens. Quite
apart from its implied racism, the
portrait is also inaccurate: there is
no evidence that the Neanderthals
stood with the slouched posture
depicted here.




                                                                                                   25
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


              'Vertebral column and limb bones showing numerous simian characters and
              indicating a less perfect bipedal or upright carriage than in modern Man. Legs
              very short.' 8 The implication was that the disparity between Neanderthals and
              modern humans would have appeared even greater if Boule had compared the
              Chapelle-aux-Saints man with a skeleton from one of the 'higher' races, such as
              a modern Frenchman.
                Differences rather than similarities were what interested Boule, and his
              yardstick was the Caucasian ideal which greeted him every morning in his
              shaving mirror. The contrast between this ideal and the Neanderthals was
              simply too great for Boule and his contemporaries. Samuel Laing, in his hugely
              popular Human Origins published in 1895, conveys the casual racism of the
              times based on an effortless sense of European superiority:

                The form of the chin seems to be wonderfully correlated with the general
                character and energy of the race. It is hard to say why, but as a matter of fact a
                weak chin generally denotes a weak, and a strong chin a strong, race or
                              9
                individual.

              What hope then for Neanderthals, the original chinless wonders, on this scale
              of values? Short legs, a projecting face and a 'coarse' brain fitted the Chapelle-
              aux-Saints fossil into a grade of life from which, under the watchful eye of his
              scientific creators, he could not progress.

                Today we are keen to say that we have repudiated such racist views, which
              were part of the discredited science known as social darwinism with its
              'scientific methods' such as eugenics. But old ideas die hard. While no scholar

              today seeks to find links between intelligence, technology, skull shape and
              genetic patterns among living peoples, such proposed associations do lie at the
              heart of the Neanderthal controversy, as we shall see in later chapters. Some
              scholars, including ourselves, believe the Neanderthals were a separate species
              from modern humans, but for entirely different reasons than Boule's. Our
              theory is based on the special nature of the Neanderthal fossils, rather than the
              features they supposedly shared with apes.



              The Neanderthal image problem
              The Neanderthals come with their own cultural baggage. No other group of
              prehistoric people carries such a weight of scientific and popular preconcep-
              tions or has its name so associated with deep antiquity and the lingering taints
              of savagery, stupidity and animal strength. Behind the lace curtains of
              civilization, it seems, lies a long, dimly lit cave which the civilized world uses to

              scare itself when it looks into the abyss of its own making. The Neanderthals,
              according to some, stand with their hands on that flimsy curtain, their shadows
                                                 10
              falling across the nursery wall.

                One of the reasons why the Neanderthals have been the focus of so much
              attention lies in the strength of visual images of them. 11 As we will see, such
              portraits are not casual sketches, but significant expressions of rival theories




26
                                                                    WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


about human ancestry. 12 But this tradition is not a new one: it extends back to
medieval and even classical times, with images of wildmen living outside the
codes of civilization and chivalry. Hence in medieval manuscripts of the Roman
author Pliny, we find illustrations of monstrous races.        A particularly good
candidate for the power of the Neanderthal image (later fleshed out by
scientists such as Boule)   was that of the Blemmyae, who lived according to
                                 13
Pliny in the deserts of Libya.        Their heads did not appear at the top of their
bodies, but were found instead on their chests, as a rather glum Blemmyae from
the thirteenth century shows. Note the eyes on the chest, the nakedness and the
club.   A small sketch from Thomas of Cantimpre's De Naturis Rerum of 1425
has a distinctly Neanderthal-like Blemmyae sandwiched between two other
mythical individuals, a Sciopod and a Cyclops. Appropriately enough from the              6   A club-wielding
viewpoint of civilization, they appear in the margin.                                     Blemmyae from a
                                                                                          thirteenth-century
  Compare these creatures with the vivid reconstruction authorized by Boule
                                                                                          bestiary of Pliny's
to illustrate his scientific findings at La Chapelle-aux-Saints (pi. 3),
incidentally one of the earliest illustrations of our fossil predecessors. It first
appeared in 1909 in the French magazine         U Illustration, and later in the same
year as a centre spread in the Illustrated London News. This excessively hairy,
Stone Age mugger has quite obviously been exiled from the mainstream of
human ancestry.
  But in 191 1, only two years later, the Illustrated London News printed quite
the opposite view: that of an equally eminent anatomist, Sir Arthur Keith.
Keith had commissioned another reconstruction of the same fossil skeleton,
which was published under the heading 'Not in the "Gorilla" stage'. Noble and
thoughtful, sitting by the fire after a hearty lunch, here is an ancestor we do not
have to be ashamed of (pi. 2). Civilization is just a haircut away.
  Another portrait of the Neanderthals appeared in 191 5, this time by the artist
Charles R. Knight (pi. 4). Supposedly based on scientific evidence, the picture
appeared as the frontispiece to Henry Fairfield Osborn's Men of the Old Stone
Age. Osborn explains their aim was to make the reconstruction 'as human as the
anatomical evidence will admit. The principle is based upon the theory for
which I believe very strong grounds may be adduced, that all these races
represent stages of advancing and            progressive development     ...   in   our
restorations we should indicate as much alertness, intelligence, and upward
tendency as possible.' 14
  However, in spite of such claims for scientific objectivity, Knight undeniably
drew on traditional imagery to make his portrait of the prehistoric past more
accessible. Depicted in wild surroundings, with bad posture, their eyes
slumped towards their chests, wielding clubs and nearly naked, the
Neanderthals were once again excluded from human evolutionary history.
There is still no archaeological evidence whatsoever that the Neanderthals
carried clubs or strolled around naked, and we will see in Chapter 4 that they            7   This Blemmyae
did not slouch either. But, just like his medieval predecessors, Knight equated           (centre) from 1425
                                                                                          shares many features
nakedness, clubs and caves with outlaws. 15 The Neanderthals were thus cast as
                                                                                          with depictions of the
outlaws from, rather than inlaws to, civilization.                                        Neanderthals.




                                                                                                           27
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS.'




Imagining the Neanderthals




                              #-/ j  Oirr n'w^, artists have put flesh on the bones of the
                              Xeanderthals in a remarkable variety of ways. (Clockwise from top
                              left) One of the earliest artists' impressions of a Neanderthal, made
                              in 1888; a ig2/ reconstruction; a igzj comparison of a Cro-Magnon
                              and a Xeanderthal typical of the misconceptions then prevalent - note
             *7               the stooped, simian appearance of the Xeanderthal and his cave-like
                              abode; Car let on Coon's very human-looking igjg portrait put the
                              Chapelle-aux-Saints individual into modern dress and gave him a
                              hair cut - his aim was to show that impressions of the Xeanderthals
                              depend largely on such superficial criteria as hair styles and clothing;
                              two images published in a ig$j volume.




28
                                                        WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?




     JltoA       M4N                     ^EAWEKW- Nm           /AoDEKrsJ         MAN)

Figures of fun
14-16   (Above) The evolution of the human
brain, according to cartoonist Sydney Harris.
(Right) One of Gary Larson s Far Side
cartoons.(Below) A vignette spoofing
                             and bone-gnawing
stereotypes of brutish, naked,
Neanderthals; published in ig^y as part of a
volume celebrating 100 years of Neanderthal
research.




                                                "Mom! The kids at school say we're a
                                                family of Nerdenthalsl ... Is that true?"



                                                                                            29
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


                The other means by which the remote past was characterized relied on an
             equally basic approach: the appeal to comedy. The comic cavemen were given
             to us by the Victorians, as in E.T. Reed's   Mr Punch's 'Prehistoric Peeps' (1894)
             which features 26 full-page cartoons ranging from a 'Prehistoric Lord Mayor's
              Show!' and the 'Unsociable Mammoth' to a 'Bank Holiday of the Period'. This
             is a   romp through prehistory and geology, with dinosaurs and fabulous beasts
             appearing side by side with shock-headed, bandy-legged males in fur wraps
             and driving contraptions, usually made in stone, all worthy of Heath Robinson.
             The result is a marvellous tilt at masculine pomposity. These cartoons have
             been copied ever since in movies such as Buster Keaton's Three Ages; in the
              1960s cartoon comedy, The Flint stones, with Betty and Wilma, Fred and
             Barney; and in the movie / Million Years BC, which pitted Racqel Welch
             against the pterodactyls (except here the men had less paunch and more bicep).
                Poor chronology and an even worse grasp of what goes with what in
             prehistory has never stood in the way of a good joke. No one today knows this
             better than Gary Larson with his Far Side cartoons. What Larson manages
             time and again is to tweak the strings attached to the icons in the caveman
             image. The success of his cartoons indicates the strength of this visual tradition,
             which relies on a few props, caves, clubs, fur wraps and bad posture.
                But the image-makers are not confined to artists. Good guys and bad guys,
             one of us or not one of us: these themes also appear in novels about the past. For
             instance,J.H. Rosny-Aine painted a very unflattering picture of the
             Neanderthals in his best-selling short story, La Guerre du Feu (191 1) and H.G.
             Wells passed an equally unflattering sentence on them in The Grisly Folk,
             published in 1921. But attitudes towards the Neanderthals softened as the
             twentieth century progressed, with William Golding (The Inheritors) and Isaac
             Asimov (The Ugly Little Boy) presenting a more sympathetic portrait of these
             folk in the 1950s. And, by 1980, Jean Auel was describing some of her
             Neanderthals in The Clan of the Cave Bear in glowing terms. These images are
             discussed in detail in the box opposite.
                The links between scientific interpretation, discovery and popular images
             are often not difficult to trace. For example, the uncompromising descriptions
             of the Neanderthals from the first half of the century undoubtedly reflect the
             expulsion of the Neanderthals from       human ancestry by scientists such as
             Boule.    To us, the force of the expulsion either by word or picture seems
             excessive. However, they influenced opinions. Even Sir Arthur Keith changed
             his    mind about the reconstruction he authorized in 191 1 and expelled the
              Neanderthals. William Golding's Neanderthals, on the other hand, appeared
             after Boule's death, when a re-examination of the Chapelle-aux-Saints skeleton

              led to a major rethink (Chapter 4). Occasionally, as with Bjorn Kurten's Dance

              of the Tiger (1980), scientists attempt to address the popular market. And part
              of the success of Clan of the Cave Bear can be put down to the careful research
              upon which Jean Auel built her story. Mostly, however, the scientific and
              popular worlds seem set on separate paths, with little exchange.




30
                                                            WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?




                   The Neanderthals in Fiction


Many authors have used the Neanderthals to explore the present.
Their short stories and novels emphasize just how close the link is
between scientific interpretations of the past and the prevailing
climate of opinion about such contentious issues as human nature,
other people, power and gender.
   Here are five famous portraits of Neanderthals from some of the
most popular writers of the twentieth century. We start with J.H.
Rosny-Aine's 1911 La Guerre du Feu, for which sales of three
million are claimed. This tale of Nature (better known today through
the movie The Quest for Fire), where the fittest survive, culminates
in the defeat of Aghoo the hairy by the 'warrior' Naoh, after
returning from his search for fire. On their travels, Naoh and his two
companions pick up some useful tricks (such as how to use spear
throwers to propel their javelins and how to make fire) from the Thin
Men, as paymentfor lending their muscle in afightagainstthe Little
Men. Despite these technological advances, the inevitable show-
down takes place between Naoh and Aghoo as it becomes obvious
that the rockshelter is no longer big enough for both of them. Naoh
eventually deals a mighty blow to emerge victorious.
   Rosny-Aine presents an unrelenting vision of primeval passions,
albeit Neanderthal passions, as the following description of the
treacherous Aghoo reveals: 'Nothing of his face was visible but a
mouth bordered by raw flesh and a pair of murderous eyes. His
squat stature exaggerated the length of his arms and the enormous
width of his shoulders. His whole being expressed a brutal strength,
tireless and without pity.' 16
   Here is a creature worth slaying and expelling from the human
race, as Boule did following the discovery of the skeleton at La
Chapelle-aux-Saints. What separates the hero Naoh from the beast
Aghoo is his love for a good woman. In the novel she becomes his
prize for returning fire to the group. She is given to him with these
ominous words from her father:
    'She shall kneel before her master. She shall go in search
    of the prey that you kill and shall bring it back on her
    shoulder. If she disobeys you, you may put her to death.'
    Naoh, placing his hand on Gammla, gently raised her up,
    and what seemed like time without end stretched out
    before them. 17

There are no surprises here about who will still be doing the
housework in 50,000 years time!
   Some of the hairy passions in La Guerre du Feu may be put down
as part of the psychological prelude to the First World War. Once the
slaughter was over, H.G. Wells continued to expel the Neanderthals
and such 'unnatural' behaviour in his classic 1921 short story, The
Grisly Folk. Wells was the consummate image-maker for the
Neanderthals. 'Can these bones live?' he cries at the start of his
story. By its end their popular fate is sealed. The big, shambling




                                                                                    3i
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?



                   creatures he described were eventually hunted down and extermi-
                   nated by the True Men' from whom we trace descent, and so the
                   Grisly Folk became a part of our forgotten past. For who would want
                   this individual as an ancestor?

                       Hairy or grisly, with a big face like a mask, great brow
                       ridges and no forehead, clutching an enormous flint, and
                       running like a baboon with his head forward and not, like a
                       man, with his head up, he must have been a fearsome
                                                                    18
                       creature for our forefathers to come upon     .   .   ,




                   The impact of Boule's Neanderthal is very clear in Wells' descrip-
                   tions. He declares we cannot begin to understand them since 'we
                   cannot conceive in our different minds the strange ideas that
                   chased one another through those queerly shaped brains. As well
                   might we try to dream and feel as a gorilla dreams and feels.' 19 Thus
                   Neanderthals were stupid and morally degenerate because they
                   looked stupid. Wells was only reiterating the wisdom of his time that
                   the entire non-civilized world functioned at the level of the child.
                     Rehabilitation, both scientific and artistic, came in the 1950s. The
                   Neanderthal novel of this decade is undoubtedly The Inheritors
                   (1955) by William Golding. He opens with a quotation from Wells'
                   short story about the Neanderthals' repulsiveness and undesirable
                   character, but then proceeds to show through them how much we
                   have lost by developing humanity without their contribution. The
                   modern humans in the book compare badly with these creatures
                   who were only carnivores through necessity, and lived lives of
                   noble simplicity. When we are finally allowed to see the main
                   character, Lok, alone and dying of a broken world we find that he

                       .   was a strange creature, smallish and bowed. The legs
                           .   .




                       and thighs were bent and there was a whole thatch of curls
                       on the outside of the legs and the arms. The back was high,
                       and covered over the shoulders with curly hair            The
                                                                                 .   .   .




                       mouth was wide and soft and above the curls of the upper
                       lip the great nostrils flared like wings. There was no bridge

                       to the nose and the moon-shadow of the jutting brow lay
                       just above the tip. The shadows lay most darkly in the
                       caverns above its cheeks and the eyes were invisible in
                       them. Above this again, the brow was a straight line
                       fledged with hair; and above this there was nothing. 20

                   This Neanderthal dies of grief rather than at the end of a club. The
                   change from Wells' Grisly Folk\s as complete as that seen recently
                   with the gorilla, in its transition from ferocious breast-beating beast
                   to an endangered species of cuddly vegetarians. The modern
                   people who have either killed or kidnapped the rest of Lok's group
                   are now the villains of prehistory.
                      Kidnapping -or rather plucking a Neanderthal child from the past
                   to satisfy curiosity in the present- is the subject of Isaac Asimov's
                   The Ugly Little Boy, first published in 1958. The story tells of the
                   indifference of scientists to Timmie the Ape-boy, as the Press dub
                   him. First impressions, indeed, are not encouraging:




32
                                                                WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?



    the boy, who seemed to be something over three years in
    age, hunched low and backed away rapidly. He lifted his
    upper lip and snarled in a hissing fashion like a cat ... It
    was the ugliest little boy she had ever seen. It was horribly
                                                    21
    ugly from misshapen head to bandy legs          .   .   .




And yet this little boy is taught to speak, and during his long stay he
captures the maternal instinct of his nurse ('I know your name is
Miss Fellowes, but - but sometimes, call you "Mother" inside. Is
                                                I




that all right?' 22 ), so that she eventually thwarts the scientists and
returns with him to his own time. All that separates us from the past
are our prejudices. What unites us are our instincts.
   Jean Auel's saga of Earth's Children The Clan of the Cave Bear
(1980) came at the right time for a modern heroine to experience the
Neanderthal way of life. Her theme is one of seeing how the intellect
copes with a world where change in the social order is mistrusted,
and strength is power. This feminist problem is illustrated not in our
own society but in one where both Nature and humans conspire to
stifle the creative rewards of natural endowment by hidebound
tradition. In her novel the male Neanderthals generally live up to
their popular image. Apart from regular wife beating, rape and
killing cave bears, the men assembled at big gatherings and

    vied in wrestling, sling-hurling, bola-throwing, arm
    strength with use of a club, running, more complicated
    running-and-spear-stabbing races, tool-making, dancing,
    story-telling, and the combination of both in dramatic hunt
    re-enactments. 23

This veritable highland  games for male flat heads, as Auel
endearingly calls them, only emphasizes their marginal role if
stripped of their strength. The injustice of their dominant position in
the Clans is underscored. While the males are male, especially in
their treatment of the heroine Ayla (who regularly comes up with
bright ideas to enhance survival only to be regarded with suspicion
for trespassing on their territory), the females are presented with
sympathy and respect as a civilizing, if repressed, force. Ayla - a
Cro-Magnon orphaned by a natural disaster - is adopted by Iza,
who at 20
    was just over four and a half feet tall, large boned, stocky,
    and bow-legged, but walked upright on strong muscular
    legs and flat bare feet    She had a large beaky nose, a
                                    .   .   .




    prognathous jaw jutting out like a muzzle, and no chin. Her
    low forehead sloped back into a long, large head, resting
    on a short thick neck.  Big, round, intelligent, dark brown
                            .   .




    eyes were deep set below overhanging brow ridges. 24
  We have come a long way from Aghoo's 'murderous eyes' and
Lok's 'dark caverns' to Iza's gaze of natural wisdom.
  The lesson from Clan of the Cave Bear is that the beneficial
qualities of females should be encouraged since they contribute to
progress by challenging the existing social order. If anything needs
expulsion from human ancestry, it is the qualities of the male.




                                                                                        33
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


              Rival theories
              As we saw above, within the halls of scientific debate two main theories of later
              human evolution have dominated discussion: regional continuity, where
              Neanderthals have    a place in     human ancestry, and population replacement
              where they do not. What is the background to this controversy?

              Models of regional continuity
              The Neanderthal phase ofWeidenreich and Coon. Apart from de Mortillet, chief
              among the early proponents of a Neanderthal phase in the evolution of modern
              humans were two nineteenth-century scholars: a German, Gustav Schwalbe,
              who assigned the Neanderthal and Spy remains to an ancestral species called
              Homo primigenius, and a Croatian, Dragutin Gorganovic-Kramberger, who
              studied the extensive fossil material from the cave site of Krapina. 25 The idea
              that the Neanderthals were ancestors to modern humans was a minority view
              for the first half of the twentieth century, being    supported mainly by the
              physical anthropologist Ales Hrdlicka and the anatomist Franz Weidenreich.
              The former argued      the   case    mainly on the European evidence, 26 but
              Weidenreich studied the remains of Homo erectus discovered during the 1920s
              and 1930s in the Zhoukoudian cave in China (pi. 95). Weidenreich's familiarity
              with many other fossils made it possible for him to produce in 1943 a model of
              the world-wide origin of the modern races which was to form the basis for the
              subsequent ideas of Carleton Coon, Loring Brace and Milford Wolpoff. 27 The
              European and Asian Neanderthals, and their supposed evolutionary equiva-
              lents in regions such as Africa ('Rhodesian Man') and Java ('Solo Man'), were
              seen as the direct ancestors in their respective regions for the modern peoples
              who live in those areas today, hence the title of regional continuity.
                Coon's development of W'eidenreich's ideas was presented in his book The
              Origin of Races (1962). 28 Using the more detailed fossil records available by
              then he ran into accusations of racism over his concept of the evolution from
              Homo erectus to Homo sapiens, since he believed that African and Australian
              populations had made the 'transition' to Homo sapiens much later than those in
              Europe and mainland Asia. 29
                The rise of the theory of regional continuity in its present form can be traced
              to a   paper by Loring Brace in 1964 entitled 'The        fate   of the "Classic"
              Neanderthals: a consideration of hominid catastrophism'. 30 Brace and other
              followers ofWeidenreich saw no reason to abandon certain fossils to the flood as
              Noah's ark set sail with only modern humans on board. Marcellin Boule, who
              had exiled the Neanderthals from our ancestry, was now recast as the villain of
              the story of human evolution and the pendulum swung back in favour of earlier
              workers such as de Mortillet and Hrdlicka, as well as Weidenreich.

              The multiregional model of Thome and Wolpoff. The issue of racism has been
              skirted round in the most recent version of Weidenreich's scheme, now dubbed
              'multiregional evolution'. The addition of the 'centre and edge' model of Alan
              Thorne and Milford Wolpoffallowed it to be argued that interbreeding or gene




34
                                                                      WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS




                        Theories of Human Evolution


Over the years the two camps favouring regional continuity or
population replacement have labelled themselves and each other
with a variety of names. Some of these are listed below.

       Population replacement             Regional continuity
           Noah's Ark                     Neanderthal phase
       Garden of Eden                     Multiregional evolution
       Gardeners                          Sons of Noah
       Out of Africa 2                    Candelabra theory
       Centre and dispersal               Centre and edge
           Mitochondrial 'Eve'            Gene Flow
In   the    tradition   of   sound box-office   policy,   we   will   use the
geographically correct term Out of Africa 2 to refer to the model of
population replacement. Out of Africa 1 refers to the earlier
dispersal of the hominid Homo erectus from Africa to other parts of
the Old World about 1 million years ago. Out of Africa 2 occurred
some time between 130,000 and 50,000 years ago. The term
'Garden of Eden' highlights the importance to this theory of a centre
for modern human origins or - if you prefer - a Noah's Ark, which
contained a special genetic variety of humans which would later
populate the world. Judging by the number of different cradles put
forward over the last 200 years (everywhere from the North Pole to
Australia, the Pampa to the Lena River), it is just as well to keep
such a centre mobile! The search for human origins thrives on
discoveries and as a result new centres may yet emerge. Evidence
from the study of variation in our genetic make-up now provides
supporting evidence for this model. We will see in Chapter 6 that
genetic scientists have attempted to trace human origins back to a
single, putative mother, hence the title of Mitochondrial 'Eve', also
known as the 'lucky mother'.
   To opponents of population replacement, on the other hand, the
Garden of Eden suggests a never-never land, a fools' paradise.
These critics prefer to be called by serious-sounding scientific
names which stress the Neanderthal phase and hence continuity in
regional populations scattered over the Old World following Out of
Africa 1. Such multiregional evolution does indeed look like a
candelabra as William Howells once observed. But in order to
distance themselves from racist interpretations that different levels
of advancement exist in the different human branches, the
adherents of continuity stress the horizontal connections between
the branches, which represent inter-regional gene flow. 'Centre
and edge' refers to the different rates of genetic and anatomical
change that occurred in prehistoric human populations, and the
visible effects of these changes. The argument goes that changes in
peripheral or edge populations will be more marked but less
frequent than for those in central locations. The difficulty is that
these centres and edges are constantly on the move. It seems
impossible either to predict or find them. Hence the other standby,




                                                                                              35
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?



                     gene flow. This can be used to explain away facts that do not fit a
                     theory of geographically isolated populations who nevertheless
                     shared many traits in common. 'Letthe genes do the walking, if the
                     bones won't play' would perhaps be a suitable motto. A theory with
                     such supple methods is obviously very difficult to test or disprove.
                        All the name-slinging just goes to show that there are serious
                     contemporary issues behind the study of the stones and bones of
                     human evolution. 31 Those supporting continuity accuse the other
                     side of justifying extinction, while adherents of replacement
                     criticize their opponents for accepting that racial differences are
                     original and historical. Matters frequently come to a head. The 1990
                     meetings of the American Association for the Advancement of
                     Science saw just such a battle between the two rival palaeontologi-
                     cal camps. 'Blood ties to Neanderthals', thundered one headline in
                     the British Press {Guardian, 19 February 1990), while another
                     countered with 'Theorists clash over human origins' {Independent).
                     Clash they certainly did, with competing sessions putting forward
                     the views of the two apparently irreconcilable camps.


                         Dr Stringer's address on the emergence of modern
                         humans was countered by traditionalist American scien-
                         tists who put on a rival show - the fossil evidence for
                         human origins - from which all traces of the modernist
                         heresy were excluded. The American group flatly dis-
                         missed the rival views and claimed that there was no
                         evidence for Dr Stringer's views either in the fossil record
                         or in studies of similarities and changes in DNA that have
                         suggested a      common     origin   for   modern humans      in

                         Africa   Professor Milford Wolpoff      said that no one
                                                                    .   .   .




                         who understood fossils could accept it. {Independent, 19
                          February 1990)

                     Sometimes, as we will see, it is all too easy to lose sight of the actual
                     data behind the theories and models which support the two views.




              flow between wide-ranging Ice Age human populations was always sufficient to
              match the tendency of peripheral ones (e.g. in Europe, Java and South Africa)
              to diverge significantly from each other (see box above). Thus the evolution of

              'racial' variation, while ancient, was always within the context of a single

              polytypic species (i.e. a species which can exist in several different-looking
              physical variants), leading to the radical suggestion that only one known species
              (Homo sapiens) has existed since the early Ice Age. 32
                 According to Thorne and Wolpoff, the Neanderthals did indeed represent
              ancestors for modern Europeans, but gene flow could have introduced some
              characteristics of modern Europeans from outside the area. Variations on the
              Neanderthal ancestor theme included an explanation for the appearance and
              disappearance of Neanderthal facial and dental specializations. According to
              Loring Brace, who christened it the culinary revolution, the changes in facial




36
                                                                                 WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS?


features were primarily related to the importance of the front teeth in
Neanderthals, since they           made great use of their incisors as a vice for
manipulating objects and even making             tools. As stone tool technology

improved, selection for large front teeth declined, and with it the need to
maintain big faces and Neanderthal-shaped skulls - or so the story goes. 33
   Less all-inclusive than the Neanderthal phase model of widespread local
continuity is the model which derives both late or 'classic' Neanderthals and
modern humans from a generalized form of early European or western Asian
Homo sapiens. For some, this common ancestor was simultaneously both more
primitive and more 'modern' than the overspecialized late Neanderthals, who
became extinct. Others included the supposedly less specialized 'early
Neanderthals' in the common ancestral group. The reasons behind Nean-
derthal specialization were not always presented,                     but   it   was sometimes
                                                                                     34
attributed to isolation and the climatic stress of the last glaciation.


The spectrum hypothesis of Weiner and Campbell. As concepts of polytypic
species developed         and genetic knowledge progressed, Joseph Weiner and
Bernard Campbell proposed the 'spectrum hypothesis' to explain past human
             35
variation.        They argued       that     just    as   variation   exists     among modern
populations, so it did in the past, within both the earliest species of Homo erectus
and the early forms of Homo sapiens. Thus forms such as the Neanderthals,
'Rhodesian Man' and 'Solo Man', were sub-specific variants of Homo sapiens,
showing different blends of characteristics. Modern Homo sapiens sapiens, the
surviving subspecies, inherited certain features from the preceding subspecies,
but the hypothesis is distinctly vague about exactly how modern humans
evolved. According to this model, the Neanderthals - particularly through
their early forms and those in the Middle East {Homo sapiens palestinus) - had
contributed to the evolution of modern people.


Models of population replacement
The presapiens model of Boule. Marcellin Boule, as we have seen, denied the
Neanderthals an ancestral role in the evolution of modern populations. This
was the 'presapiens' model further developed by Boule's student and successor,
Henri Vallois. 36 In their view, the advanced features of modern humans must
have had a long gestation period, and the Neanderthals were a relict species
from an ancient common ancestor, probably at least one million years old. The
unique combination of primitive (even ape-like) and specialized features in the
Neanderthals       left   no   possibility    that    they were closely related to their
successors and terminators, the modern-looking and highly sophisticated Cro-
Magnons of Europe. Instead the Cro-Magnons must have derived from small-
browed and gracile (lightly built) ancestors represented in the early European
fossil   record.    Their lineage evolved             and co-existed        with   that   of the
Neanderthals, who had instead evolved from more primitive and large-browed
forms. This model allowed the Neanderthals to be replaced by their successors,
but Europe to remain central to the origin of modern humans.




                                                                                                         37
WHO WERE THE NEANDERTHALS:


              The Out of Africa model. The final hypothesis we will discuss is a variant of a
              general   model termed 'Noah's Ark' by the American scholar William
              Howells. 37 The Noah's Ark model proposes that there was a recent, single
              ancestral population of modern humans in only one region of the world, and
              that all modern people derived from this common ancestral group by evolution
              and dispersal. 'Out of Africa', as the name implies, selects Africa as the original
              homeland of modern humans and gives no ancestral role to the Neanderthals.
              The model has been developed over the last 15 years by several researchers,
              including Chris Stringer and Peter Andrews, as studies seem to point
              increasingly to Africa as the continent where modern humans, and perhaps also
              aspects of modern behaviour, first evolved. 38 Out of Africa has been greatly
              favoured by the attention of geneticists in the last few years, 39 but has also met
              strong resistance, particularly from a vociferous group of American scholars.



              Ancients and Moderns

              The Ancients (the term we are using to describe all pre-modern humans) were
              widespread in the Old World. They apparently left Africa over a million years
              ago and developed into several regional populations, of which the Neanderthals
              are only one    example (Chapters     3   and   4).   Their culture and    societies,

              campsites, use of landscape and contacts between groups are the subject of
              Chapter 7. The Moderns - people who physically looked like ourselves -
              appear much later, probably less than 150,000 years ago (Chapters 5 and 6).
              However, it is not until after 60,000 years ago that we see a massive expansion in
              their numbers and geographical range. Furthermore, we have to wait in some
              parts of the world until after 40,000 years ago to find the full suite of material
              culture, including art, that is - like global colonization - another hallmark of
              modern behaviour (Chapter 9). Modern anatomy is not necessarily synony-
              mous with modern behaviour and we shall see that in Western Eurasia the
              archaeological evidence points to a critical phase of development between
              60,000 and 40,000 years ago. Finally the fate of the Neanderthals is spelt out in
              Chapters 8 and 9.
                The study of the Neanderthals inevitably focuses attention on the question
              of what we mean when we use the term 'modern human'. Any such definition
              rests   on an understanding of the enormous physical,          social   and cultural
              differences which make up our present world, with its mosaic of multi-cultural
              societies. The ability to set down what is important about ourselves then allows

              us to identify - from the anatomy of fossil hominids and their archaeology -
              alternative patterns of behaviour and survival which we believe stand outside
              the reasonable limits of our definition of modern humans. The interest in the
              Neanderthals is therefore as much in ourselves and where we draw the line of
              humanity as in them. Are they just an earlier reflection of ourselves, seen
              through the distorting mirror of time, or are they a negative to our positive,
              polar opposites in body and behaviour?




38
                                 CHAPTER 2

                          The Ice Age World



On the northern fringes of the inhabited Ice Age world the repeated glaciations
of the last 1.6 million years, known as the Pleistocene epoch, had some of their
greatest impact. In this chapter we will examine the European evidence for
early human habitation and begin to look further afield.
  Understanding Ice Age geology is important to our story for three main
reasons. Firstly, it can help us to reconstruct the habitats in which the Ancients
and Moderns lived. The evidence from animal bones, pollen grains, sediments,
insects, molluscs and many other materials give us an invaluable insight into

human existence at the local level. Secondly, it is possible to derive a sequence
of long-term fluctuations in the earth's climate from evidence of successive ice
advances. This can then be related to changes in faunal and floral communities,
to provide a relative chronological      framework for the period. During the
Pleistocene such changes were considerable; many animal species appeared and
became extinct. A good example is the giant deer, Megaceros, which had an
antler span of 3.6 m (c. 12 ft). These Ice Age animals failed to survive the last
post-glacial warming that began 10,000 years ago (and continues in our present
warm interglacial period). Thirdly, Ice Age geology gives us the opportunity to
examine the forces at work behind human evolution. How important were
climate and environment in shaping the biology and behaviour of the Ancients
and the Moderns?


Traditional Pleistocene frameworks and their problems

The early history of investigation into past ice ages was dominated by work in
Europe. Geologists such as Agassiz, Lyell, Geike, Penck and Bruckner not only
established that large areas of Europe had been formerly glaciated, but also
provided estimates of the time involved and the number of successive
               1
glaciations.
  Most importantly it also proved possible in Europe to establish the high
antiquity of human ancestry through the association of stone tools with extinct
Ice Age animals like mammoths. Such discoveries were being made in 1859 in
the gravel deposits of the Somme and Thames by Prestwich and Evans, as well
as at Brixham      Cave and, earlier, at Kent's Cavern. 2 In North America the
glacial deposits were also studied in great detail but, despite continuing claims,

none of them has produced any Palaeolithic (Old Stone Age)               artifacts

irrefutably older than 15,000 years. 3
  Until recent decades, the favoured geological model for the Pleistocene was




                                                                                     39
THE ICE AGE WORLD



              of four ice ages separated by three much longer interglacials, when the climate
              was similar to that of today. Two geologists, A. Penck and E. Bruckner, set
              down this system in their great three-volume work Die Alpen im Eiszeitalter
              published in 1909. Their field work was in the Alpine Foreland of southern
              Germany, in the region around Munich. This area bears many traces of the
                    of the Alpine glaciations. The low, round hills and long thin lakes
              effects

              running north-south are just two examples. The former were created from the
              mounds of debris (moraines) left behind after the retreat of the ice sheets, while
              the finger lakes - similar in origin to those in upper New York State, which lie
              to the south of the former North American ice sheet - occupy hollows either
              gouged out by the ice or trapped between two parallel moraines.
                 Bruckner and Penck named their four ice ages after the river terraces of four
              tributaries to the Danube: the Giinz, Mindel, Riss and Wurm, the last being
              the most recent. 4 The origin of these terraces was shown to be climatic:
              extensive sheets of gravel were built up by sluggish meltwater streams at the
              edge of the ice sheets which were then cut by the more active rivers of the
              interglacials. The step effect of the river terraces was therefore a guide to the

              number and relative duration of the Pleistocene ice ages.
                 The entire span of the four ice ages was estimated from the amount of time
              thought necessary for the rivers to lay down and then cut through these terrace
              deposits. Penck and Bruckner calculated some 600,000 years in total, of which
              240,000 years was taken up by the great interglacial which separated the Mindel
              and Riss glaciations.
                    The Pleistocene epoch is now known to have lasted much longer than this. It
              is currently subdivided into early,   middle and late stages, which are dated to 1.6
              million-730,000 years ago, 730,000-130,000 years ago and 130,000-10,000
              years ago respectively.     Changes    in   animal and marine faunas were very
              important for recognizing these larger subdivisions.
                    The Alpine model was devised at much the same time as the discovery of
              Neanderthal remains at the cave sites of La Chapelle-aux-Saints, Le Moustier
              and La Ferrassie. Using the Alpine chronological system, scholars were able to
              compare animal fossils from the river terraces with those from cave sediments
              to establish a framework for relative dating fossils and stone tools found at cave

              sites.
                     5
                       More recently, work by Henri Laville on the climatic conditions
              reflected in the composition and structure of the cave sediments has led to an
              elaborate dating scheme for many of the key French Palaeolithic cave sites, its
                                                                                                 6
              relative chronology still underpinned by Penck and Bruckner's model of 1909.
                    However, there are problems with all these frameworks. The main difficulty
               is that theyhave been constructed from discontinuous data. River terraces and
               moraines could have been removed by later glaciations and river action. No
               cave contains a complete sediment sequence through the Pleistocene: all have
               seen periods when the sediments either stopped accumulating or, worse still,
               were eroded away. Moreover, dating the sequences has always been a problem.
               In some cases distinctive stone tools have been used to date particular layers
               and in others e.g. in northern France and southern England, sequences have




40
                                                                          THE ICE AGE WORLD




            The Creatures from the Deep-Sea Cores


Cores drilled into the soft sediments of the ocean floor contain
skeletons (madefrom calcium carbonate) of many different species
of microscopic animals, known collectively as foraminifera. The
foraminiferal lifespan is short, and a constant rain of these
creatures falls onto the sea bed to create sediments of 'foraminifera
(or Globigerina) ooze'. Over periods of millions of years, these
skeletons can accumulate to form sedimentary masses such as the
chalk hills and cliffs of southern England, now uplifted from their
original positions under the sea.
   But how can such microscopic creatures help us to establish a
chronologyforthe Pleistocene? When alive and living atthesurface
of the ocean, foraminifera absorb two isotopes of oxygen contained
                                                  18
in the sea water. As the numbers indicate,            and 16 differ in
isotopic 'weight'. When the oceans are small, as happens during
continental glaciation, moisture which is drawn off to build the ice
sheets takes with itthe lighter 16 isotope. This leaves an ocean that
                                    18
is isotopically 'heavy' in terms of    0. As the ice caps melt, as they
seem to be doing under the Greenhouse Effect today, the returning
water swells the size of the ocean and makes it isotopically 'lighter'.
The fluctuating ratios of the two isotopes are recorded in the
skeletons of the foraminifera.
   Cesare Emiliani was able accurately to measure the amount of
each isotope within the minute skeletons using a mass spectro-
meter. When enough specimens had been analysed from a long
core it was possible to plot the differences in the ratio of the two
isotopes againsttime. Fig. 17 shows the 18 0: 16 ratio in the standard
core V28-238, measured on the planktonic foraminifera Globigeri-
noides sacculifera.
   What does this tell us? On the basis of earlier cores, Emiliani
argued that the changing ratios of 18 and 16 revealed a repeated
pattern of interglacial and glacial climates, indicated by odd and
even numbers for the isotopic stages. Using the isotopic curves
from the Caribbean and equatorial Atlantic, he then translated his
findings into a generalized curve of Ice Age temperatures. These
were only estimates of temperature and, while many species in the
Globigerina-ooze are sensitive indicators of sea temperature, this
is not expressed directly in the isotopic ratio. Many experts today

feel that oxygen isotope ratios are more representative of the
relative sizes of the oceans and ice caps than of actual ocean
temperatures.
  In his 1955 paper 'Pleistocenetemperatures' Emiliani interpreted
the 14 isotopic stages in terms of the Alpine system. His age
estimates for the late Pleistocene were remarkably good, but he
shoehorned the period between 100,000 and 300,000 years into too
short a chronology. Absolute dating of later cores such as V28-238
has shown that stage 14 in Emiliani's generalized curve would beat
least 530,000 years old, in the middle Pleistocene, and therefore
200,000 years older than the first estimates.




                                                                                         4i
THE ICE AGE WORLD



              been subdivided according to the position of the artifacts on a scale of crude to
              fine artistry. This progressive scale was translated into a chronology with crude

              execution indicating an early age and fine technique a date nearer the present. 7



              The modern Pleistocene framework from deep-sea cores
              Today the course of the Pleistocene is believed to be best defined by the
              stratigraphic record obtained from cores drilled into the sediments of the ocean
              floor. This revolution in Pleistocene studies was begun by Cesare Emiliani in

              1955 when he scientifically analyzed the tiny marine organisms contained in the
              muds and oozes from deep-sea cores and deduced varying oxygen isotope
              (
               I8
                  0: I6 0) ratios from them (see box on p. 41). The challenge to the traditional
              schemes of Penck and Bruckner came from Emiliani's discovery that the deep-
              sea cores contained a much more continuous record of the Pleistocene ice ages.
              This was     in   contrast to the piecemeal and discontinuous nature of the
              Pleistocene record on land.
                  The full significance of this approach was recognized by (among others)
              Xick Shackleton, who refined the procedures and made a more accurate
              interpretation of    what the saw-toothed curves meant        for describing   and
              understanding the Pleistocene period. 8 Shackleton pointed out that the oxygen
              isotope curves charted the size of the oceans relative to the land-based ice caps
              throughout the Pleistocene. 9
                  Dating these cores was the second innovation to transform Pleistocene
              geology. The top few centimetres of the cores could be dated by radiocarbon
              techniques. However, ages older than 35,000 years could hitherto only be
              estimated since they were either beyond the effective range of conventional
              radiocarbon dating, or did not contain suitable materials for other techniques
              such as Potassium Argon (K Ar) dating, which also measures time through the
              predictable decay of isotopes in volcanic rocks. 10 The solution to the problem
              came from the geomagnetic studies of terrestrial rocks which had also been
              absolutely dated by such methods. As part of the post-war revolution in crustal
              geology known as plate tectonics, it was found that polarity changes can be
              measured in many volcanic rocks. For reasons not yet understood, the earth's
              polarity has on numerous occasions completely reversed so that the magnetic
              north pole becomes the south and vice versa. Many of these reversals are short-
              lived,   but the major epochs of reversed and normal (today's) polarity were
              constant    for   very   long   periods   of time   and so provide the principal
              chronological blocks determining the internal partitions of geological epochs
              such as the Pleistocene. 11
                  The two magnetic polarity epochs which concern us here are the Brunhes
              (normal) and  Matuyama (reversed). The boundary between them is dated
              absolutely to about 730,000 years ago. This is accepted as a world-wide marker
              between the early and middle Pleistocene. 12
                The oxygen isotope ratio has now been measured in many hundreds of cores.
              The output is characteristically saw-toothed in shape with the zig-zags




42
                                                                                        THE ICE AGE WORLD




  S     CO




                                                                Top of core
                                                                13000
                     z:                  c                  2
                                                                24000
                      5            CD


                                   n
                                         o                  3
                                                            4
                                                                59000
                                                                71000
                                   D w
                                         a>                 5
                                         CL


                                                            6



                                                            7

                                                                245000
                                                            8




  o
       X

       g
                          3         0)
                                    r
                                    0)


                                    o
                                                        10
                                                            9
                                                                339000
                                                                362000
                                    w
                                    CD

                                   n                            423000
                                                        12
                                    in                          478000
                                   X3                   13
                                   X3                           524000
                                   ^                    14
                                                                565000
                                                        15
                                                                              ij  The Pleistocene climate, as
                                                        16                    recorded in deep-sea core V28-
                                                                659000
                                                        17
                                                                689000
                                                                              238 taken in the Pacific Ocean.
                                                        18                    The tint shows how the amount
                                                                726000                       I8
             1200"
                                                                              of the heavy        isotope varies
                                                                736000
                                                                              with the depth of the core. At


                      2                       Cold stages
                                                                              1,200 cm the sediments show a
                                                                              change in magnetic polarity
                                                                              which can be dated by absolute
  CO   <                                                                      methods to c. 730, 000 years ago.
  DC   >
  LU   Z>                                                                     The other dates shown are
  >    H                                      Warm stages
  LU   <                                                                      estimates based upon their depth
  DC   ^                                                                      within the core.




recording, from a single location, the relationship between ice and ocean
volume. The standard core V28-238 for the middle and late Pleistocene is
shown above. It contains eight climatic cycles - each consisting of a glacial and
interglacial stage - in the last 730,000 years. 13 The single cycle of the late
Pleistocene extends back to 130,000 years ago while the middle Pleistocene
contains seven full climatic cycles back to 730,000 years ago.                The early
Pleistocene runs, as we have seen, from about 1.6 million to 730,000 years ago
and contains a further 20 shorter cycles.


The new cycles
The new Ice Age chronology is much more complicated than the old, four
glaciations system of Penck and Bruckner. Instead of short, convenient names
like Wiirm or references to the 'Great Interglacial', we are faced instead with a

string of stage numbers, and letters denoting sub-stages. Remembering the age
of such stages will never be easy. Moreover, there is still much work to be done




                                                                                                                   43
THE ICE AGE WORLD



              when it comes to assigning Pleistocene archaeological sites - many of which do
              not yet have absolute dates - to any one of these stages. Neither has it been
              possible to accommodate to everyone's satisfaction the old regional Pleistocene
              sequences in Europe into the new chronology.
                 The important concept to grasp is that a full climatic cycle in the Pleistocene
              is made up of two major parts: a glacial and an interglacial. As a result the saw-

              toothed curve is divided into interglacials (odd numbers) and glacials (even
              numbers). There are exceptions to this rule, the most significant being the last
              cycle, the late Pleistocene. Because of greater resolution between the deep-sea
              cores and evidence left behind on the land, more stages can be recognized. 14
                     The ages of each stage are shown in fig. 17. When a full cycle is considered we
              can see that as we get closer to the present the cycles get longer. From the start
              of the Pleistocene 1.6 million years ago to 900,000 years ago a full cycle was
              completed every 40,000 years. In the transition from the early to the middle
              Pleistocene (900,000-450,000 years ago) the duration of a cycle stretched to
              70,000 years, before hitting a 100,000-year rhythm in the last four full cycles,
              the most recent of which is the late Pleistocene.
                     Such a lengthening of stride has implications                       for several evolutionary

              questions. Elsewhere attempts have been made to link the appearance of new
              hominid species to these changes in climatic pace, 15 and the timing of the Homo
              erectus radiation from Africa about 1 million years ago (Chapter 3) is also put
              down by some to a climatic push. 16 While the changes in the duration of long-
              term climatic cycles are intriguing, it is difficult at the moment to see exactly
              how they might be responsible for the appearance of regional populations of
              Ancients, such as the Neanderthals.
                     The climatic cycles produced a succession of contrasted environments, some
              of which were longer lived than others. Their variable duration must have had a
              considerable impact on the selection for adaptive solutions to survival
              problems. If we look at the late Pleistocene we can see that, far from a simple
              division into interglacial/glacial (warm/cold), there were rapidly fluctuating




                ie
                         9     8             7              6                5            4      3      2    1
               stages                                                e   d   c   b   a




                         vAjK^J
                                                                                                                 High
                2 0-



                                                                                                                  SEA
                                                                                                                 LEVELS
                3 0-

                3-3-




               18 Ice and ocean levels, as recorded by the proportion of lH      in this core,   have greatly fluctuated
               over the past 300,000 years. The last interglacial (isotopic stage $e) stands out as a brief episode
               of exceptionally large oceans. The maximum ice conditions (i.e. low sea levels) in stages 6 and 2
               are more prolonged. During most of the past 300 millennia, however, the climate evidently rested
               between the two extremes of interglacial and full glacial.




44
                                                                                                           THE ICE AGE WORLD



conditions. Sometimes it has also been possible to match the peaks in the cores
                                                                                       17
with changes in tree cover as indicated in the pollen record.                               Rather than a
twofold division of each climatic cycle, the combined evidence points to at least
four and possibly five major environmental phases,                              some of which - on a
Pleistocene timescale - did not last for very long.


                   Climatic                      Estimated                Isotope               % of
                  conditions                     years ago                 stage              last cycle

           1     Interglacial                 130,000-115,000              5e                     13

       2         Early glacial:               115,000-75,000               5d-a                  34
                 temperate/cool

       3         Early glacial:               75,000-30,000                4,3                   38
                 cool/glacial

       4         Full glacial                 30,000-13,000                2                      15

       5         Late glacial                 13,000-10,000

           1     Postglacial                  10,000-present
                 (present
                 interglacial)


                  ig   The last full climatic cycle (the late Pleistocene) and the early stages of
                                                 the present cycle.


The            table   above 18 indicates that the two shortest-lived phases are the
interglacial and full glacial. If we estimate how much of the last 730,000 years
(the middle and late Pleistocene) has consisted of phases comparable to 1 and 4,
we find it is only 8 per cent and 36 per cent respectively. In fact, for the majority
of time that Ancients were in Europe, environments and climatic conditions
were somewhere between these two extremes, represented by phases 2 and 3 of
the early glacial and the transition to the succeeding interglacial. 19 In a
northern continent such as Europe, these phases were mostly characterized by
open landscapes with herds of large mammals living off the rich herb layers and
vegetation mats.                  These were the conditions which shaped Neanderthal
adaptation. It was in these long-lived, highly productive open landscapes that
they made a living for many millennia.



Climate and environment in the Neanderthal world
What long-term conditions did the Neanderthals have to cope with? To answer
the question we first need to establish the chronology of their evolution. The
defining anatomical features of the Neanderthals are discussed in detail in
Chapter 4. Suffice it here to say that some of these features first appeared about
230,000 years ago, with the full suite present by c. 130,000 years ago (Chapter
3).
      20
               We can be more precise about their demise since the last known
Neanderthals, found in France, are currently dated to about 35,000 years ago,
suggesting that by 30,000 years ago there were no more Neanderthals. 21 What
happened climatically during their 200,000-year existence?
      A quarter of a million years ago was the beginning of an interglacial stage (fig.
                                                                                       22
18) but in fact conditions were not those of a peak interglacial.                           This contrasts




                                                                                                                          45
THE ICE AGE WORLD



              with the extreme nature and high sea levels of the last interglacial which started
                                                                                             23
               130,000 years ago and lasted for a mere 15,000 years or                 so.        The early
              Neanderthals on the other hand lived through a variety of repeated climatic
              phases. The temperate cool (phase 2), and sometimes glacial (phase 3) climates,
              were probably critical in selecting for some of the classic Neanderthal features
              that many believe are related to coping with low temperature and aridity. The
              climates and landscapes of the Neanderthal world were dominated by phases 2
              and 3 of the early glacial (see table on p. 47) which, together, prevailed during
              about 70 per cent of the time the Neanderthals existed. The very instability of
              climate, the relatively short duration of each individual phase and the rapid
              transition from one phase to another provided strong selective pressure on the
              anatomy of the robust European Ancients from which the Neanderthals are
              descended (Chapter 3).


              The last climatic cycle: a world-wide view
              What happened to global climate during a single climatic cycle? What were the
              Ancients, including the Neanderthals,         up against in terms of the size and
              frequency of environmental changes? To provide an answer we will examine
              the late Pleistocene, the most recent complete cycle. The last 130,000 years
              provide the best available evidence for reconstructing Ice Age habitats since no
              subsequent glaciations have obliterated the traces of Pleistocene environments,
              and data for this epoch have been most studied.
                     In concentrating on the last cycle we are not suggesting that every detail was
              identical to earlier cycles. But many of the conditions - e.g. aridity, periglacial
              conditions close to ice sheets, the appearance of continental shelves as the
              oceans shrank in size - would have been similar and appeared at roughly the
              same stage in other cycles. Earlier populations would have had to respond to
              these recurrent changes. We will first look at the global changes faced by the
              Ancients in general before turning to the Neanderthal world in particular.


              Phase 1: the interglacial (130,000-115,000 years ago)
              The last cycle began abruptly as sea levels rose quickly and the maximum ice
              advance of isotopic stage 6 swiftly retreated. 24 The pace of animal migrations to
              match these rapidly changing conditions is striking. Hippopotami lived not
              only along the Thames (a nice specimen came from Trafalgar Square), but as
              far north in England as Victoria Cave in Yorkshire where an absolute date of
                                                                            25
              c. 1   20,000 years ago puts it firmly in the interglacial.        The pollen records all
              point to heavily forested conditions, with the northern deciduous forests and
              equatorial rain forests at maximum extent. Lake levels were generally high, as
              this was a period of moist conditions. Sea temperatures, as indicated by higher

              proportions of warm-loving foraminifera species in the deep-sea cores show
                                                                                      26
              that sub-tropical waters almost reached the British Isles.                   There is also
              evidence for higher sea levels even after local tectonic uplift has been taken into
              account, perhaps 5      m (16 ft) above the modern global mean.



46
                                                                                               THE ICE AGE WORLD


                                                                             Hominid evolution

Climatic conditions              Estimated          Isotope   Western Eurasia             Far East
                                 years ago          stage     and Africa

Mainly temperate or cool,        250,000-180,000      7       Transitional 'archaic       Late ere
with some glacial intervals.                                  Homo sapiens' to early      Homo sapiens' in China;
Large oceans, small ice caps                                  Neanderthals in Europe,     late erectus in Java
                                                              late 'archaics' in Africa


Full glacial with some milder    180,000-130,000      6       Early Neanderthals,         Archaic Homo sapiens'
intervals.                                                    fixation of many            inChina; late erectus
Small oceans, large ice caps                                  Neanderthal features        in Java?
                                                              in Europe. Transitional

                                                              archaic to early
                                                              Moderns in Africa?

Last interglacial, warm          130,000-115,000      5e      Neanderthals in Europe      'Archaic Homo sapiens'
conditions.                                                   and perhaps also in         in   China; late erectus
Large oceans, small ice caps                                   Middle East; first         in Java?

                                                               Moderns in Africa and
                                                               possibly in Middle East


Temperate/cool                   115,000-75,000       5d-a     Neanderthals (?) and       'Archaic Homo sapiens'
                                                               Moderns in the Middle      in   China; late erectus
                                                               East                       in Java?



Cool/glacial                     75,000-30,000        4-3      Neanderthals extinct       Moderns appear in
Ice caps increasing                                           at end of this period;      Far East
                                                               Moderns appear in
                                                               Europe

20   Climate and chronology for the Neanderthals and other hominids.




     Compared to the present warm period this last interglacial was a world of
megafauna. Hippopotami, straight-tusked elephants and narrow-nosed rhino-
ceroses were found in the British Isles, while in the far north the arctic fauna
would have been enriched by woolly mammoths and woolly rhinos as they
sought refuge from the forests and warmer temperatures of the south.
Elsewhere in the world (inhabited by contemporaries of the Neanderthals)
there were changes in the fauna. In China the panda and the Stegodon, an
extinct elephant, apparently moved north, and there were crocodiles in large
rivers such as the Yangtze. At this time, before humans had reached Australia,
the antipodean fauna included the Diprotodon marsupials which were roughly
the shape and size of rhinos. These grazed alongside giant kangaroos, over 3                   m
(10 ft) tall, while the large marsupial carnivore Thylacoleo must have been a
formidable predator.


Phase 2: early glacial, temperate/cool (115,000-75,000 years ago)
The downturn in temperature after 1 1 5,000 years ago must have helped to thin
out some of the megafaunal species in the more northerly latitudes inhabited by
Neanderthals. These hominids were ideally suited to such open environments.
In Europe the more broken, but still wooded, conditions started to favour herds




                                                                                                                     47
THE ICE AGE WORLD



              of grazing species such as red deer and horse. In the middle latitudes this phase
              saw severe disruptions to tree cover and vegetation as climate fluctuated
                      27
              wildly.    Elsewhere in the world inhabited by other populations of Ancients (as
              well as by some of the oldest anatomically modern humans), this temperate/
              cool phase saw a lowering in temperature and the appearance of limited
              amounts of continental shelf as the seas fell due to the build-up of the ice sheets.

              Phase 3: early glacial, cool/glacial (75,000-30,000 years ago)
              The exposed area of continental shelf increased dramatically in the next, much
              colder phase of the early glacial. In northern latitudes tree cover was reduced to
              refuge woodlands along well-sheltered valleys, while the high moisture content
              and cold temperatures produced large frozen ground features such as ice
              wedges which were driven down into soft sediments. Today such ice wedges
              can be traced by the different deposits which filled the cast when the ice had
              later melted.

                    In Central Asia and China the period of soil formation that had reached its
              height during the interglacial and continued through phase 2 of the early
                     now ceased abruptly. The soils were covered by a mantle of loess -
              glacial,

              wind-blown sediments - which signals a lack of covering vegetation in such
              continental areas. The appearance of ice sheets both in the north and more
              locally on mountain chains      produced large quantities of ground-up rock or
              'rock flour', which was also moved by rivers at the edge of these ice sheets and
              spread into fans. Such unvegetated areas in front of the glaciers formed another
              source of material for wind erosion. The massive deposits of sediment in parts
              of central Europe formed a sort of Pleistocene dustbowl, and point to the arid,
              open environments at this time. 28 If we follow the trail of loess from western
              Europe to Central Asia we find 200-m (650-ft) high loess hills, e.g. at Dushanbe
              in Tadzhikistan. Equally impressive sections can be found in China.

                    Between 75,000 and 32,000 years ago the deep-sea and ice cores point to
              rapid oscillations in ice to ocean volume. The climate generally was in a state of
              flux (fig. 18). From 70,000 to 60,000 years ago there was a major cold period and
              some ice advance. 29 Around 40,000 years ago there was a series of small climatic
              ameliorations before the trend towards a rapid and continuing climatic decline
              took hold. 30
                    Research in the Negev Desert has shown that in the Middle East, phase 3
              enjoyed periods of wet and humid conditions. Water sources were more
              permanent, as at Far'ah in the Negev Desert around 40,000 years ago, 31 and in
              the central Negev at sites such as Boker Tachtit. 32 Even the well-named Wadi
              Arid - 200 km (125 miles) east of Lake Nasser in Egypt and one of the driest
              places in the Sahara - has evidence for lakes, indicating wetter conditions some
              45,000 years ago. These, however, were short-lived and variable episodes,
              comparable in this respect to the interstadials (minor warm periods within the
              glacials) of northern latitudes.

                    In some areas the moister conditions were more stable, due in part to local
              hydrology. Wetter conditions prevailed at the now dry Willandra Lakes in




48
                                                                                      THE ICE AGE WORLD



western New South Wales (Australia). 33 Between 50,000 and 25,000 years ago
these lakes were full and supported a rich diversity offish and shellfish, acting
as a magnet for human settlement as shown by the thousands of tools, camp
fires and occasional burial and cremation around       the former Lake Mungo.


Phase 4: full glacial (30,000-13,000 years ago)
The final, full glacial phase changed all this. There was a marked downturn in
northern climates between 30,000 and 20,000 years ago. The rapid growth of
continental and mountain ice sheets led to a world-wide drop in sea levels. The
last glacial maximum, which saw the full exposure of the continental shelves

can be dated to 18,000 years ago (perhaps             earlier),   long after the     last

Neanderthals had perished. However, similar conditions must have prevailed
at the previous glacial      maximum some 160,000-140,000 years ago, when the
Old World was peopled by Ancients such as the Neanderthals.
      In northern latitudes, at the last glacial maximum 18,000 years ago, the
unglaciated part of southern England was joined by dry land to what is now the
continent of Europe.    At the same time the continental shelf between
northeastern Siberia and Alaska was exposed over an area of at least 1 million
sq.    km (400,000 sq. miles). 34 This formerly dry land is known as the
palaeocontinent of Beringia. In the mid latitudes of Southeast Asia, the Sunda
shelf was exposed when the sea dropped by as much as 150               m (500 ft) below
present levels. Together with the 600-km (370-mile) wide plain that appeared
in the East China Sea, this added 2.5 million sq.    km (nearly    1   million sq. miles)
of land to Southeast Asia. Across the Sunda trench this same lowering of sea
level united       Papua New Guinea, Australia and Tasmania into the super-
continent of Sahul. Finally the continental shelf around the Cape of southern
Africa was also exposed to a maximum width of 100 km (62 miles). 35
  As might be expected, the exposure of such shelves and the reduction in
vegetation on the continents had dramatic effects. In many parts of China,
Central Asia and central and eastern Europe there was intensified accumulation
of loess. The impact of the last glacial maximum 18,000 years ago produced
geographical refuges for plants, animals and in many areas human popula-
         36
tions.        The tropical rain forests of Southeast Asia, Africa and Amazonia were
reduced to relatively small refuge areas as the savannahs expanded. In western
Eurasia people focused on hunting reindeer and horse while a similar tight
concentration, this time on red-necked wallaby, is known from caves occupied
at the    height of the last glacial maximum on the other side of the world, in
southwest Tasmania. 37 In Europe, the areas closest to the ice sheets were at
most settled intermittently by humans, such           as in   Germany, 38 and were
frequently abandoned, as was apparently the case in Britain during the last
glacial maximum. 39



Phase 5: late glacial (13,000-10,000 years ago)
The final phase of the glacial corresponds with the upturn in climate and the
recolonization by plants and animals of many hitherto abandoned areas. This




                                                                                                     49
THE ICE AGE WORLD



              climatic process      is   known as the late glacial. The timing and speed of this
              process varied with latitude. 40 In northern Europe there was a burst of activity
              after 13,000 years         ago and forest regeneration dating from this time can be
              traced in the pollen record. 41 The deep-sea and ice-cap cores both point to the
              very rapid change in ice:ocean ratios. These were faster than the onset of glacial
              conditions. The changes in lower latitudes were no less dramatic. In Australia,
              the Willandra lakes became closed and highly saline, and after 15,000 years ago
              they dried up completely. A similar trend towards drier conditions is repeated
              in other arid regions,        such as in southern Africa and throughout the Middle
              East.
                 The speed of this climatic change is perhaps one reason why so many animal
              extinctions took place in the late glacial phase. Species never emerged from
              their geographical refuges. This produced a very different animal world in most
              of the inhabited continents. 42 Climate was almost certainly not the only cause of
              these extinctions, however, and its effect may well have been compounded by
              increased predation by          modern humans, as in North America where the
              mammoth abruptly disappeared about 10,500 years ago. The onset of the
              postglacial (Holocene or recent epoch) after 10,000 years ago also saw many
              significant changes to the world's fauna. Animal extinctions did occur in earlier
              cycles but the role of the Ancients in such extinctions was probably minimal.



              Resources in the Neanderthal world
              Within the Neanderthal world (map pp. 10-11) it is generally agreed that
              animal resources were very important for survival. While we do not doubt that
              plants were consumed when they were abundant and readily available, it does
              seem that the criteria for occupying seasonal habitats at higher latitudes lay in
              the exploitation of animal resources.         We will discuss later (Chapter 7) how
              these     resources    were     obtained,   whether   by   hunting,   scavenging   or   a

              combination of such foraging techniques. At this point we will concentrate on
              the variety of animals available, to indicate the range, in both time and space, of
              such basic food sources within the Neanderthal world.
                The sites we have chosen to review are widely dispersed throughout the
              Neanderthal world. They consist of both caves and open sites. The oldest
              occupation was probably in the cave site of Tabun, with one of its levels - level
              E - dated by electron spin resonance (ESR: see box on pp. 58-59) to between
              220,000 and 50,000 years ago. A number of the sites date to climatic phase 2 -
                              1


              the temperate conditions of the early glacial - from 1 1 5,000 to 75,000 years ago
              (Combe Grenal, La Borde, Il'skaya and Tabun levels C-B). Phase 3 sites,
              between 75,000 and 30,000 years old, are well represented as colder climates
              with less tree cover took hold (Combe Grenal, Stadel, Guattari cave, Erd).
              Occupation of the caves of Teshik Tash and Kudaro may also date to this
              phase.
                    The sites are also located in a variety of settings. Teshik Tash is in rugged
               mountains at a height of 1,500 m (c. 500 ft). Kudaro is situated in the Caucasus




50
                                                                                                  THE ICE AGE WORLD




                 mammoth                              woolly rhinoceros                        hippopotamus




                                                       ^V-y
       aurochs                  bison                       musk ox                    horse                  steppe ass




 giant deer                            red deer                             reindeer                         fallow deer




ibex                  chamois           saiga antelope             wild sheep              roe deer               gazelle




                                  cave bear                           brown bear




              cave lion
                                       ^?   leopard
                                                                      tcM*
                                                                            lynx                  wild cat




           hyena                wolf                      badger              fox/jackal         wolverine



                                            21    A Neanderthal bestiary.
THE ICE AGE WORLD


                                  Wadi El-Mughara caves




                                                                  22 The inhabitants of Mount Carmel
                                                                  (Wadi el-Mughara) exploited a
                                                                  variety of different environments. The
                                                                  dotted line represents territory within
                                                                  a i -hour walk from the cave. Over
                                                                  time the shifts in forest and dry steppe
                                                                  influenced the animals available for
                                   forest      dry uplands        hunting within a 5-km radius.




              range. Shanidar lies at an altitude of 765     m (2,500   ft),   but in plateau country
              rather than heavily dissected terrain.      Tabun, in the Mount Carmel cave
              complex outside Haifa, is close to the sea and at a relatively low altitude. As the
              sea rose and fell during the long periods it was occupied, so the catchment of the
              site - the territory potentially exploitable within walking distance - changed

              dramatically (see figure above). This was also the case at the Italian cave
              complex of Monte Circeo in which Grotta Guattari is located, but here the
              coastal shelf is more limited. Continental open sites are found at Il'skaya in the
              Russian plains to the northeast of the Black Sea, Erd in Hungary, and the cave
              of Stadel - part of the Hohlenstein complex - located at 470         m (1,540 ft) in the
              southern German uplands. Finally, two sites that would have enjoyed the
              ameliorating effects of a maritime climate, the cave of Combe Grenal and the
              open site La Borde, are both in the rolling limestone plateaux country of
              southwestern France.


              Variety in space
              The table opposite shows how the local fauna - identified from their bones -
              differed between sites in the Middle East and Central Asia (Tabun, Shanidar,
              Teshik Tash) on the one hand and those in Europe on the other. 43
              The greatest differences are amongst the carnivores and the megafauna. This is
              not surprising when we consider the range of climates - maritime, continental,
              mountain and arid - covered by these sites. Distinct faunal provinces cannot be
              found, just a gradual increase in some steppe species as we move east.
                But there is more variety to be unearthed in our sample. When we examine




52
                                                                                             THE ICE AGE WORLD


                                                                     Middle East
                                                Europe            and Central Asia

               Carnivores               Cave bear, lion,         Wolf, hyena, jackal,
                                        hyena, wolf, leopard,    tawny fox, brown
                                        arctic fox, red fox,     bear, extinct fox
                                        lynx, wolverine,
                                        badger, wild cat,
                                        Caucasian dhole

               Herbivores               Aurochs, bison, giant    Red deer, fallow deer,
                                        deer, horse, red deer,   gazelle, wild sheep,
                                        reindeer, pig, roe       wild goat, pig, roe
                                        deer, ibex, chamois,     deer, onager, steppe
                                        steppe ass, saiga        ass, hartebeest
                                        antelope, wild sheep,
                                        musk ox

               Megafauna                Mammoth, woolly          Hippopotamus
                                        rhino


               Large rodents and        Porcupine, hare,         Beaver, marmot, pika,
               lagomorphs               rabbit, marmot           hare, rock hyrax




           23 Variation in the types of animals inhabiting the two major areas of
      Neanderthal settlement, Europe and the Middle East, c. 200,000-35,000 years ago.




which species and groups of animals dominate the faunal collections excavated
from these sites, we find some interesting geographical patterns. In the first
place, carnivores - particularly those which use dens to hibernate or raise their
young, such as bears and hyenas - are more common in the centre of the
Neanderthal world (fig. 21) than at its edge. This distribution may help to
explain why complete Neanderthal skeletons are mostly found in areas such as
the Middle East and France (Chapters 4 and 7), for carnivores seem to be rarer
in these regions, and destruction by them of skeletal evidence is therefore much

reduced. Erd, Kudaro and Stadel are all dominated by the remains of the many
thousand cave bears that died during winter hibernation. It is also common at
these sites to find hyena associated with the bones of horse and woolly rhino.
The extent to which such den-users as hyenas and wolves brought bones to the
sites, so creating their own 'archaeological' record, is a point we examine

further in Chapter 7. These carnivore-dominated bone collections suggest that
life in the centre of the          Neanderthal world was probably under more intense
selection pressure, as a result of competition from other predators for basic
resources, than that in the            Middle East and western Europe, France and
          44
Iberia.
  When we look at the dominant herbivores at Neanderthal sites, the east-west
division       becomes much clearer. The high-level sites of Teshik Tash and
Shanidar have yielded abundant bones of wild sheep and goat.                            Tabun is
dominated by fallow deer and gazelle. Evidence from European sites, where
carnivores were rare, shows that the auroch (giant extinct cattle) was the main
species predated at La Borde, while at Il'skaya it was bison. At Combe Grenal it




                                                                                                            53
                                                                                               1




THE ICE AGE WORLD



               wis red deer and reindeer. At the carnivore sites the picture is less dramatic: no
              one species is usually so numerically dominant. At Stadel, Erd and Kudaro,
               h    ree,   steppe ass and red deer are, respectively, the most common herbivore
               species in the faunal record. At Guattari the emphasis is on red deer, with large
               bovids and horse in second and third place.


               Variety in time
               Three of these sites - Combe Grenal, Stadel and Tabun - have long sequences
               which span at least two climatic phases. As the table below shows, the changing
              climate is reflected in the faunal remains.              The transition from temperate to
               glacial conditions at              Combe Grenal favoured open country reindeer rather than
               the woodland red deer. At Stadel horses were always the main herbivore, but
               red deer were replaced by woolly rhino, bovids and reindeer as the climate
               worsened. Finally,                  at       Tabun dominance swung between fallow deer and
                     die, reflecting wetter and then drier conditions.



              Srte                               Date                   Number of Species              Dominant    Dominant
                                                                   Carnivores          Herbivores      Carnivore   Herbivore

              Combe Grenal                  115.000-75.000                   5             1                       Red deer,
                                                                                                                           son.
                                                                                                                   horse

                                            75.000-40.000                    5             10                      Reindeer, horse
                                                                                                                   red deer


               Stadel                       115.000-75.000               10                    9       Bear        Horse, red deer

                                            75,000-^0,000                    7                 8       Err hyena   Horse, rhino,
                                                                                                                   bos/bison

               Tabun
               Level E:                     220.000-150.000                  4                 7                   Fallow deer,
                                                                                                                   gazelle

               Level D:                     170.000-120.000                  5             12                      Gazelle

               Level B:                     110,000-60.000                   4             11                      Fallow deer


                                 24    Changes in the faunal remains at the sites of Combe Grenal ( France 1.
                                                      ..del (Germany I and Tabun (Israel).
                                                        \




               Dating the Palaeolithic

               The variety in the fauna of the Neanderthal world, which we have touched on
               in the last section, will                    become clearer as more detailed chronologies become
               available. At the moment we are still hampered by rather broad chronological

               schemes, many of which still rely on the typological dating of artifacts. As we
               shall       see    in        Chapter         7.   this   is       a   dangerous procedure and should be
               discouraged/             5
                                             Moreover, using the faunal and floral evidence to provide a
               relative date can also be hazardous now that                                        we have abandoned Penck and
               Bruckner's four ice age<. because particular associations of animals and plants
               probably recurred                  many times in the Pleistocene; we must instead try to




54
                                                                                           THE ICE AGE WORLD



correlate our terrestrial evidence with the more continuous records from the
deep sea.
   The European Palaeolithic or Old Stone Age - an archaeological as opposed
to a climatic term like the Pleistocene - does, of course, embody a chronological
model in its internal divisions. For the past century it has been divided into
three stages like the Pleistocene (but usually entitled Lower, Middle and Upper
rather than early, middle and late), and these divisions form the building blocks
for classifying archaeological materials in   Europe and Asia. (In Africa, the
stages are   known as the Early, Middle and Late Stone Age. 46 ) The Lower
Palaeolithic's trademark artifact is the hand axe, complemented by the pebble
tool/chopping tool (pp. 56-57). The Middle Palaeolithic generally lacked such
large stone    implements (see Chapter 7) and instead contained many tools
classified   according to their probable function as scrapers, which involved
retouching or modifying the edges of struck flakes (pp. 144-45).
  Early excavations in the rockshelters above Le Moustier in southwest France
gave rise to the general term Mousterian for the European Middle Palaeolithic.
In the decade before the First World War several finds of Neanderthals were
made with these Mousterian/Middle Palaeolithic stone tools. This led some
authorities to declare that Neanderthals    were exclusively the people of the
Mousterian culture, 47 a view which recent evidence has disproved (Chapter 7).
  The third great stage was the Upper Palaeolithic, also defined by its
technology. Stone-working tools now included a predominance of long, thin
parallel-sided blanks known as blades. Art and ornament appear for the first
time in the archaeological record of this stage. In 1868, E. Lartet and H. Christy
discovered the skeletons of several anatomically             modern people            in   the
rockshelter of Cro-Magnon, above the Vezere village of Les Eyzies. They were
found with the distinctive elements of Upper Palaeolithic technology.
  Science-based dating techniques are         now available to date the entire
Palaeolithic. 55 Refinements in radiocarbon dating have extended the European



       FROM A POUND OF FLINT
         THE ABBEVILLEAN OBTAINED
         2 INCHES OF CUTTING SURFACE          25   The transition from Lower
                                              Palaeolithic (Abbevillean) hand
                                              axes, through Middle Palaeolithic
                                              (Mousterian ) scrapers, to Upper
                               2 INCHES       Palaeolithic (Magdalenian)
                                              blades. This diagram presents a
         THE ACHEULEAN OBTAINED   _           very progressive view of
                                              technology, indicating the
                                              increasing efficiency of Palaeolithic
                                              tool makers.
                               8 INCHES


        THE MOUSTERIAN OBTAINED




                         40 INCHES

        THE MAGDALENIAN OBTAINED




         mDnsBissgiinii                                                                                   55
THE ICE AGE WORLD




                        Stone Technology of the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic




                    The manufacture     of   stone artifacts starts with a lump of raw
                    material. This might be a nodule of flint grubbed, for example, from
                    a collapsed chalk cliff or picked up as a pebble from a riverbed.
                    Flint is a particularly good raw material since it flakes in a predict-
                    able manner and has a very sharp natural cutting edge due to its
                    fine grained structure. As a result it is common to talk of conchoidal,
                    or shell-like, fracture patterns which produce distinctive flake
                    forms. 48
                       There are two starting conditions: the quality of the raw material
                    and its size. Beyond this the requirements and techniques of the
                    knapper take over. Knapping experiments have produced a
                    number of insights into the process whereby a stone nodule is
                    reduced either to a core tool or a set of flakes for further
                    modification. 49 The experiments have shown that the reduction
                    sequence involves three major steps. First, the shape of the core or
                    tool is defined through the removal of a series of roughing-out
                    flakes. This is usually best achieved by using a hard hammer to
                    detach the flakes, many of which will carry cortex, the outer skin of
                    the nodule, on their surface. A small pebble makes an ideal hard
                    hammer. Then follows a succession of shaping flakes which perfect
                    the form of a core tool or, in the case of flake production, the core
                    from which they will be struck. These flakes are much thinner, and
                    frequently a soft hammer of antler or possibly wood will be used for
                    this second stage. The soft hammer provides greater control,
                    evidentfrom the slender, more delicate flakes which are produced.
                    The third stage consists either of finishing the artifact with a series
                    of sharpening flakes or of resharpening the tool. It also involves
                    preparing the striking platform on a core for the removal of flakes.
                    The blows are very controlled and these finishing flakes are often
                    very small indeed. The soft hammer is almost obligatory for the
                    final stage.
                       The most distinctive core tool of the Lower Palaeolithic is the
                    hand axe. Hand axes vary enormously in size, weight, shape and
                    degree of finishing. They may be pointed, ovate or triangular, while
                    others have been described as bottle, ficron, lanceolate and
                    almond-shaped. 50 Hand axes are often, but not invariably, bifacially
                    worked. With such careful working on both faces a clear profile is
                    produced, and this is often regarded as the working edge of the
                    implement. The earliest hand axes appeared 1.5 million years ago
                    in Africa and are part of the Acheulean stone industry, named after

                    the town in France where they were first recognized in the last
                    century. The Acheulean is widespread throughout the Old World
                    following the first dispersal of hominids out of Africa about 1 million
                    years ago. The Middle Palaeolithic generally lacks such large
                    bifaces although smaller, more knife-like hand axes are common in
                    the period after 200,000 years ago.




56
                                                                             THE ICE AGE WORLD




      26   A Lower Palaeolithic tool kit. Two Acheulean hand axes: a
     pointed axe from Swanscombe, b ovate from Boxgrove. Pebble tools
     and flakes: c,d pebble choppers or cores; e flake; f chopper or core.


   Other Lower Palaeolithic core tools consist of cleavers with a
transverse cutting edge, and pebble tools. The latter were formed
by a few simple blows which produced an irregular cutting edge.
Such a tool probably took only a few seconds to make, while one of
the highly finished hand axes might have taken up to 10 or 15
minutes.
   The flakes produced in these reduction sequences are of course
perfectly serviceable. They may be irregular in shape and size, but
they possess razor-sharp cutting edges. The inspection of these
edges under low-power microscopes can reveal traces of edge
damage resulting from use. 51 Higher magnification reveals distinc-
tive polishes which experimental work is attempting to identify with
working particular materials, among them wood, meat, plants and
bone. 52
   Detaching flakes from a core can take several forms. When
rotated during successive flake removals, a distinctive piece known
as a disc core is often produced. Flakes of various sizes will have
been produced during the process and these will generally be
broad in relation to their total length. (The length is always
measured from the point of impact which may be preserved on the
edge of the flake as a platform, while on its underside a pronounced
cone of percussion and radiating ripple scars can often be seen.)
Disc cores are common in both the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic.
An alternative means of flake production involves the Levallois
technique (explained on p. 149). When used abundantly it is
sometimes considered a hallmark of the Middle Palaeolithic, as in
the Levalloiso-Mousterian industries of the Middle East 53 which we
shall encounter in Chapter 7.




                                                                                            57
THE ICE AGE WORLD




                               Absolute Dates for the Middle Palaeolithic


                    Radiocarbon provided the first breakthrough in dating human
                    occupation in the recent Pleistocene up to 35,000 years ago.
                    Potassium/argon (K/Ar) techniques did the same for the earliest
                    Pleistocene and Pliocene in East Africa at sites such as Olduvai
                    Gorge, between 1 and 2 million years old. 54 In the middle there
                    stubbornly remained a long period of about 1 million years which
                    proved difficult to date absolutely (aptly named by archaeologist
                    Glynn Isaac the 'muddle in the middle'). New techniques are rapidly
                    changing this situation, as the dates in Appendix 1 show.
                       Recent developments in thermoluminescence (TL) dating of
                    burnt flint and loess sediments are very important. TL works as
                    follows: rocks and sediments contain small amounts of natural
                    radiation, which causes damage to crystalline substances such as
                    flint by displacing electrons. When flint is heated in a fire or
                    sediments are exposed to sunlight, the damaged electrons are
                    'neutralized' by the energy and the radioactive clock is set to zero.
                    Then the process of accumulating radiation damage begins afresh.
                    To obtain a date, the amount of radiation damage which has been
                    absorbed since zeroing is measured by heating the sample in a
                    laboratory to 500°C or more, to release the energy of the displaced
                    electrons. As the name of the technique implies, the energy emitted
                    is expressed as a glow curve.

                       A related technique to TL is electron spin resonance (ESR) dating
                    which measures accumulated natural radiation damage in crystal-
                    line substances such as carbonates and tooth enamel. Microwave
                    radiation causes displaced electrons to give off a signal which is
                    proportional to the amount of radiation damage incurred. The
                    method has been particularly important in dating fossil mammal
                    tooth enamel associated with Middle Palaeolithic human fossils
                    such as those from Kebara, Qafzeh and La Chapelle-aux-Saints.
                       Uranium-series dating    of   carbonates has proved extremely
                    reliable for flowstone deposits in caves, and travertines deposited
                    by springs at open sites. What is measured here is the radioactive
                    decay following the uptake of uranium into the carbonate as it
                    forms. The amounts can be measured and an age derived by using
                    the known decay rates for uranium and thorium isotopes. Since
                    Palaeolithic materials are often found in caves and are even, on
                    occasion, actually encased by travertine or stalagmitic concre-
                    tions, this technique has proved extremely useful in areas
                    such as Europe where volcanic materials for K/Ar dating are
                    limited.




58
                                                                                     THE ICE AGE WORLD




  Uranium-series dates are increasingly cross-checked by ESR
techniques applied to teeth and bone material.


Dating technique                                     Range of technique
                                                          (years ago)
                                           upper limit        lower limit

TL (burnt flint)                           ?2,000             100,000-500,000

TL (unburnt sediments)                     5,000-10,000       50,000

ESR                                        Present            More than 1 million
U-series (for thorium-230)                 5,000              350,000
14
     C (Radiocarbon)                       Present            50,000, possibly
       using Accelerator Mass                                 70,000 in the future
      Spectrometry (AMS)
14
     C (Radiocarbon)                       Present            40,000
      conventional methods


              2j   The chronological range of various dating techniques.



A good example of the uses of such dating techniques comes from
Pontnewydd cave in North Wales where recent excavations by
Stephen Aldhouse-Green have unravelled the complicated history
of the site. The cave was covered by the last two ice sheets, the first
of which - about 160,000 years ago - had sludged deposits into the
cave from its entrance outside. Once this debris flow was inside,
however, it was safe from further erosion by the last ice sheet
18,000 years ago. As a result the fragmentary hominid remains and
hard rock tools contained in the cave were preserved. Dating these
finds has proved possible from the stalagmitic flowstone adhering
to the walls of the cave, and from lumps found in the sediments. That
these stalagmites were formed under warmer, moist conditions is
confirmed by thorium/uranium dates of about 200,000 years ago.
This places Pontnewydd firmly in the interglacial stage 7, and
perhaps more precisely in the warmer phase 7a that reached its
peak about 215,000 years ago.
   Pontnewydd also produced burnt flint for TL dating. Joan
Huxtable has produced consistent figures of 200,000 years ago for
these samples. The different materials and methods of dating are
therefore in excellent agreement. We discuss Pontnewydd further
in Chapter 7.




                                                                                                    59
THE ICE AGE WORLD



              Upper Palaeolithic back to more than 40,000 years ago. 56 Uranium-series dates
              on carbonates, ESR dates on mammal teeth and thermoluminescence dating of
              sediments and burnt flint (see box pp. 58-59) have confirmed the antiquity of
              the Middle Palaeolithic and pushed the age of Mousterian industries back to
              more than 200,000 years ago. Indeed, the division between the Lower and
              Middle Palaeolithic has become harder rather than easier to define with the
              advent of absolute dates and we shall discuss why in Chapter 7. 57 The Lower to
              Middle Palaeolithic transition probably occurred between 250,000 and 200,000
              years ago. Beyond this the Lower Palaeolithic, as traditionally defined,
              stretches back to the first colonization of the European continent which had
              taken place by at least 700,000 years ago and possibly much earlier. 58
                We have compiled a short list of dates for the Middle and Lower Palaeolithic
              (Appendix  1). While these dates are still too few - and in some cases too

                       -
              uncertain to permit elaborate interpretation, we can nonetheless now derive a
              world-wide chronology for the Ancients that was not possible even 20 years
              ago. The few absolute dates for Europe currently point to occupation by the
              Ancients in the open phases 2 and 3 of the repeated climatic cycles (see tables
              pp. 45 and 47). No doubt as our chronologies and techniques are refined, we
              will see that human populations ebbed      and flowed in northern Europe and
              other areas close to the ice sheets as conditions approached those of phase 4 in
              the last cycle. Using data on the animal communities which inhabited the
              Neanderthal world, we would suggest that such fluctuations in human
              settlement were more frequent in those central and northern areas where we
              have already drawn attention to competition from other carnivores as a result of
              harsher conditions.



              Neanderthal distribution
              The 'centres' of the Neanderthal world, as defined by continuity in settlement
              and fossil material, are very much at the edge of the distribution of the skeletal
              evidence: the Middle East and western Europe. As the story from the fossil
              evidence unfolds in the next three chapters       we will see a very different
              prehistory in these two areas. In the west the classic Neanderthals emerge. In
              the east there is a long period when Neanderthals coexisted or overlapped with
              anatomically   modern-looking populations,       both   making   similar   Middle
              Palaeolithic stone tools. Finally, despite the rarity of long archaeological
              sequences, the central region in the Neanderthal world has yielded evidence of
              many interesting changes (Chapter 9) in their life-style.
                This chapter has shown us, however, that we are not going to find easy
              environmental answers to our question of how or why the Ancients were
              different from the Moderns, or even if the former were ancestral to the latter.
              The way to understand these fossil populations is to place them in the sweep of
              human evolution starting about 1 million years ago with the first dispersal out
              of Africa and ending with the appearance of the Moderns. It is now time to look
              at these Ancients in more detail as an example of evolution in action.




60
                                     CHAPTER 3

                     Neanderthal Beginnings

There is nothing obvious in the prehistoric record. There are no simple
answers, just a cornucopia of discoveries, observations, ideas and theories.
These are the resources with which to investigate our long-term ancestry.
  The problem has always been knowing where to begin. At what point do we
break into the cycle of research into human origins? We will start with the fossil
evidence because our focus      is   on a particular population of Ancients, the
Neanderthals. When we have looked at the current data and ideas concerning
their European origin and their even earlier African ancestry we will turn to the
issues of how evolution works, as a prelude to the debate in later chapters
between explanations for regional continuity and population replacement (box
PP. 35-36)-



African genesis

Fieldwork has shown us that the earliest humans were restricted to only one
continent, Africa. Notwithstanding occasional claims for areas such as China,
Java and, most recently, Georgia, the earliest members of our genus Homo -
                                      1




dated to between 1.5 and 2 million years ago - seem to have lived in southern
and eastern Africa. The species Homo habilis, 'handy man', was identified on
the basis of fossils found between 1959 and 1 961 by Mary and Louis Leakey in
Beds I and II at Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania). 2 The concept of this earliest human
species was that it represented the first toolmaker, and consequently possessed
a larger brain   than the more primitive and contemporaneous australopithe-
cines. (These australopithecines lived between c. 5 and 1.3 million years ago in

parts of south and east Africa. In a number of respects they were intermediate
between apes and humans, and they combined ape-sized brains with an upright
bipedal stance. They are not regarded as fully human by most experts because
of features such as their small brains, large teeth, big projecting faces, flat noses,
ape-like body proportions and apparent lack of human behaviour.)
  The original Olduvai habilis fossils date between 1.5 and 1.8 million years
ago, but the geographical     and chronological range of the species was soon
extended by other finds from Olduvai, Omo (Ethiopia), Koobi Fora (East
Turkana, Kenya) and Sterkfontein (South Africa), which was also an
australopithecine cave fissure site. 3 However, as the range and extent of the
fossil samples increased in space and time, so too did the degree of variation.

Thus while the concept of a very primitive species of human with a relatively
small brain and big teeth gained general acceptance, the feeling also grew that
the pattern of human evolution            was even more complicated than it had
originally appeared.




                                                                                         61
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


      4 MILLION                     3 MILLION                    2   MILLION                   1   MILLION YEARS AGO




                                                                                                          Modern humans
                                                                                                           sapiens)




                  28 Diagram illustrating one of many possible interpretations of human evolution over the last
                  four million years. According to this view, the human family tree consists offour adaptive
                  radiations: the australopithecines, paranthropines, early    Homo and later Homo. The use of the
                  term 'archaic Homo sapiens' is currently in some doubt.



                  How many early humans are there?
                  Many researchers now feel that there is not just one kind of Homo habilis.
                  Instead there seems to have been a large- and a small-bodied species, the large
                  one represented by fossils such as the skull known as ER-1470 (East Rudolf,
                  now East Turkana, specimen number 1470), and the small one by fossils such
                                                4
                  as the ER-1813 skull.             Both types can be clearly distinguished from both the
                  australopithecenes and from the subsequent species of Homo erectus. However,
                  it is   not at all clear which one should be regarded as the 'real' Homo habilis and
                  which one needs a new species name. Several names have been suggested,
                  among them Homo ergaster or 'work man', and Homo rudolfensis. It is also
                  unclear from where these early humans first evolved, and which of the species,
                  if either,   was the ancestor of Homo erectus.
                     While some of these early humans had brains no larger than australopithe-
                  cines, the skull shape as a whole was somewhat longer, with signs in some
                  specimens of a stronger brow ridge and a more angular back to the skull. These
                  features clearly foreshadow the skull form of Homo erectus. In addition the face,
                  while still large and transversely flat, was tucked under the skull to a greater
                  extent, and some fossils show a more projecting nasal region - a proper nose - as
                  in later humans.

                    There is some dispute about what the rest of the body was like in the earliest
                  humans. There are leg bones and a hip bone from Koobi Fora which are large




62
                                                                        NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


enough to have come from a Homo erectus skeleton, but which are more likely to
derive from the same large-bodied habilis population as ER-1470. Of about the
same antiquity, 1.8 million years, is a tiny skeleton from Olduvai - Olduvai
Hominid (OH) 62 - which resembles that of the well-known australopithecine
'Lucy', found in Ethiopia,         which   is   over one million years older.   The
                                                     OH 62, barely over
resemblance is not only in the small estimated stature of                           1


m, but in the non-human limb proportions. Like Lucy, OH 62 has long arms
and short legs, but has been assigned to Homo habilis on the basis of its jaws and
         5
teeth.

  So, both above and below the neck, there is now ample evidence that more
than one species of early human must have existed in East Africa between 2 and
1.5 million years ago,      and also that they lived alongside surviving robust
australopithecines of the species Paranthropus boisei. Known as the 'near man
of Boise', after a benefactor of the Leakeys, the best-known example was
discovered at Olduvai by Mary Leakey in 1959. Moreover, there was a habilis-
like species in South Africa, whichmay be related to the East African forms.
And here too there is evidence of coexistence with robust australopithecines,
this time of the species Paranthropus robustus.




Enter Homo erectus

But as Homo habilis, in its various specific guises, faded from the scene by 1.5
million years ago in East Africa, a new kind of hominid was already present, one
whose membership of the genus Homo is not subject to any of the doubts which
still pervade the earlier fossil material. This new kind of hominid was either the

earliest form of the species     Homo erectus, or a more primitive ancestral form
which requires a new species name. Some workers, such as Bernard Wood,
prefer to call this hominid Homo ergaster. b But to keep this account as simple as
possible,    we will refer to this particular early East Africa material as 'early'
Homo erectus, as long as the reader bears in mind that the important issue of
classification is by no means resolved.

  The early Kenyan Homo erectus is represented by a nearly complete skull
(ER-3733), a braincase (ER-3883), jaws and jaw fragments (e.g. ER-992, for
which the species name H. ergaster was given7 ), and several bones from the rest
of the skeleton. Some of this material may be as old as 1.8 million years, thus
overlapping with Homo habilis specimens as well as Paranthropus.
  By far the most spectacular find has come from the west side of Lake
Turkana in Kenya. This was a chance discovery in 1985 by a member of
Richard Leakey's field team, following the recognition of a small fragment of
skull as     human. Careful searching and sieving, followed by a controlled
excavation, eventually revealed the   most complete skeleton of an ancient
hominid over 1 million years old yet discovered. The skeleton, dated at 1.6
million years, belonged to a boy of about 1 1 years old, who was already c. 1 .62   m
(5 ft 4 in) tall.   The find dispelled the notion that all Homo erectus individuals
were short and stocky, since this West Turkana boy (WT-15000) was certainly




                                                                                            63
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              very muscular but also long-limbed, possessing similar body proportions to
              people living in East Africa today. 8 Still younger in date are finds from Olduvai
             Gorge, such as the braincase known as            OH 9 which   is about   1.2 million years
                    9
             old.



             Out of Africa 1 and regional developments
             Homo erectus continued to evolve in Africa during the middle Pleistocene,
             giving rise to later forms represented by fossils such as Bodo and Broken Hill
             (see       Chapter 6). However, Homo erectus is believed to have been the first
             hominid species to have spread from the original African homeland to the
             continent of Asia, and perhaps also Europe. The conventional wisdom is that
             this       occurred around      1    million years ago. But in 1989 a    human jaw was
             discovered from the site of Dmanisi in Georgia which could be as old as 1.6
             million years. 10 If this date is confirmed by further study, it would imply that
             Homo erectus had dispersed much earlier, and might even call into question
             whether erectus had actually originated in Africa. The Dmanisi find is
             particularly interesting in the light of recent claims for artifacts as old as 2
             million years in Pakistan. 11
                As we        shall   see,   for    some palaeoanthropologists -   particularly   those
             favouring regional continuity - this dispersal is the beginning of the process
             which culminated in the modern human races. By the time Homo erectus was
             established in the Far East, after 1 million years ago, the skull form had become
             significantly more robust than the early African examples. These more 'typical'
             Asian erectus populations had long and flattened skulls with heavy brow ridges,
             thick skull walls, and strong buttresses around the braincase (especially along
             the top, a sagittal ridge) and, across the back, an occipital ridge or torus. 12 A
             comparison of the early Homo erectus African skulls with late Asian erectus
             specimens from China and Java, over 1 million years younger, shows a 25 per
             cent increase in average brain size, as measured from the inside volume of the
             braincase (1150 ml compared with 850 ml). Whether the increase is entirely
             related to an increasing intelligence rather than some other factor, for example
             an increase in body size, is still uncertain. A larger body size could be due to
             changes in life-style, or adaptation to cooler environments with a correspond-
             ing increase in body weight. Certainly the little material we have from erectus
             skeletons throughout the Old World after the West Turkana boy suggests that
             these were very robustly built people with large joint surfaces and thick-walled
             limb bones. These fragmentary data lend some support to climatic adaptation
             as a possible explanation for a number of these changes.
                By 730,000 years ago, at the beginning of the middle Pleistocene (Chapter 2)
             - and perhaps earlier still according to the Dmanisi fossil and controversial
             archaeological evidence elsewhere 13 - Homo erectus had colonized the Middle
             East and southern Europe. But the earliest archaeological sites in the Mediter-
             ranean regions of Europe have yielded no fossil material.                The evidence is
             almost exclusively stone tools (see box pp. 56-57). We have to wait some 200,000




64
                                                                                      NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


high, domed skull                                                                            low, flat skull


                                                                                                                       angled occipital
                                                            strong                                                     bone
                                                            brow ridge
                                        small
                                        brow ridge                                                                        occipital
                                                                                                                          torus (ridge)




                                        chin                no chin
Homo sapiens                                                                                                       Homo erectus
(European Upper Palaeolithic)                                                                                                   (Java)
                                                                                                                   5 cm
                                                                                               1   1   1   1   1   j

2Q Skulls of a robust modern human from Kostenki (left) and a reconstruction o/Homo erectus
from Java, illustrating important differences between the two species: the earlier specimen features
a more prominent supraorbital torus, a lower more receding forehead, a highly angled occipital
bone, a greater facial projection, and lack of a chin.




years before our first view of the earliest Europeans, and even then the material
comes only from the northern regions of the continent. There is no secure
evidence that they reached more northerly areas such as Germany or peripheral
areas such as Britain until 500,000 years ago, at the earliest. By this time there is
some evidence that Homo erectus had evolved into a new species in the west
while maintaining the more typical erectus morphology in the Far East, as at
Zhoukoudian - the 'Peking Man' site - occupied episodically over the period
from more than 500,000 to 250,000 years ago, and at Ngandong (where the
Javanese 'Solo Man' was found), settled perhaps as late as 100,000 years ago.
   The western forms were developing subtly different braincase shapes;
several specimens possess a fully modern-sized brain and a less robust skull
architecture. These changes are thought by many scholars to signal the first
appearance of our own species, Homo sapiens, in an early form called 'archaic'
Homo sapiens. Others prefer to designate a species distinct from both erectus
and sapiens; they have called it Homo heidelbergensis after the Mauer lower jaw,
believed to be about 500,000 years old, found in a sand pit near Heidelberg in
        I4
1907.        Some of these changes in European skull morphology can be seen as
foreshadowing that of the Neanderthals, whose origins we will now discuss.



The origins of the Neanderthals
Most palaeoanthropologists accept                that   the   Neanderthals evolved from
European middle Pleistocene ancestors who were either a late form of Homo
erectus      or a   descendant of that species. 15 This would be either  Homo
heidelbergensis or 'archaic'       Homo sapiens. The development of many of the
features that later characterize the Neanderthal face, skull bones and mandible




                                                                                                                                      65
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              (Chapter 4) had certainly occurred by the end of the middle Pleistocene. The
              fossils from Biache-St-Vaast and the Abri Bourgeois-Delaunay (part of the La

              Chaise complex of caves in southern France) date from that period, more than
              125,000 years ago (table p. 47).
                Even more ancient, according to recent dating by uranium series and
             electron spin resonance, are the skull, jaw and other skeletal parts of several
             individuals - including at least one child - from the site of Ehringsdorf near
             Weimar in Germany. 16 A rich flora and fauna thrived in and around the warm
              springs of this region, and the well-preserved remains of plants, leaves, snails
             and large mammals have been recovered from the thick travertine (carbonate)
              deposits laid down by the springs, along with those of 'early' Neanderthals and
              their tools. Occupied about 230,000 years ago, it was presumably a prime site
              for game and plant foods even in the winters of a temperate stage (Chapter 2). If
              the Neanderthals did split from the lineage leading to modern humans, then the
             Ehringsdorf date of 230,000 years ago also gives a minimum age for the
              beginning of the separate lineage of modern people.
                Although the fragmentary Pontnewydd specimens from Wales (see box pp.
              58-59) are arguably even more securely dated at about the same age, 225,000
              years ago, as the Ehringsdorf fossils, they can only really be linked to the later
              Neanderthals by the common trait of molar taurodontism,             a   condition of
              unseparated tooth roots and expanded pulp cavities (Chapter 4).
                However, it is considered probable by several research workers that the
              origins of the Neanderthals lie even further back in the middle Pleistocene,
              amongst the populations represented by                found at Swanscombe
                                                               fossils

             (England), Steinheim (Germany), Arago and        Montmaurin (France), Ata-
             puerca (Spain) and Petralona (Greece). The status of the Swanscombe skull
             fragments has changed considerably from the time when the find was allied
             with the hypothetical ancient presapiens lineage leading exclusively to modern
             people (Chapter 1). These three parts of the back of a (probably female) skull,
             were found on separate occasions in 1935, 1936 and 1955, in a gravel pit in north
              Kent. Yet they fit together nearly perfectly (pi. 22). Thousands of flint hand
              axes have been found in the same levels (Chapter 7). The features of the cranial
              base and occipital torus are reminiscent of those of the Neanderthals, while the
              parietal bones are rather short and flat. Particularly important, there is a central
              depression in the occipital bone (the suprainiac fossa) which           is   present in
              Neanderthals generally.
                The Steinheim skull, found in a gravel pit near Stuttgart in 1933, is a more
              problematic specimen, with  a much smaller brain size than Swanscombe

              (estimated at 1100 ml, compared with Swanscombe's 1325 ml). The skull is
              rounder and thinner, but the forehead - not preserved in Swanscombe - is low
              and narrow, with a strong brow ridge (pis. 23, 24). The upper jaw is flat with a
              rather modern-looking and hollowed cheek region, but this might be partly due
              to the crushing and twisting which the skull underwent during fossilization. The

              back of the skull seems to show a suprainiac         fossa, like   Swanscombe.       Is

              Steinheim thus a very primitive Neanderthal,          its   differences from other




66
occipital
bone                                                            low frontal bone



                                                       strong
                                                       brow ridge




depression
(suprainiac fossa) v -

                                                                    tSfcf
                 Swanscombe                                                  Arago 21


                                                   strong
                                                  brow ridge


                                                                                                                angular
                                                                                                                occipital bone



                                                                                                                occipital torus
                                                                                                             (ridge)



rounded                                       hollowed                             inflated cheeks (no canine fossa)
occipital bone                                cheek
                                              (canine fossa)
                                                                             Petralona
                                                                                                         5 cm
                                                                                           l   I   i   J_l

jo European middle Pleistocene fossil hominids. The Swanscombe 'skull' has a hypothetical
reconstruction based on the Steinheim specimen.



Neanderthals accentuated by its small size and gracility (due to its female
gender), as well as its antiquity? This is a difficult question to answer, and it
partly depends on how we view the controversial Petralona cranium (see below).
   The large sample of fossil hominids from the Caune de l' Arago, Tautavel, in
southern       France    is   probably    more ancient than            the    specimens            from
Swanscombe, Steinheim and Pontnewydd, and is dated at about 400,000 years
old.
     17
        There are about 60 specimens. Many of these consist of fragmentary
dental and postcranial parts, but there is a nearly complete hip bone, two jaw
bones and the front, face and right side of a skull (pi. 20). The hip bone is
strongly built, and its robusticity is more like that of much earlier African Homo
erectus fossils than that of the Neanderthals. The jaw bones show a considerable
difference in size, probably reflecting differences in sex, with the larger one
resembling Homo erectus, and the smaller one Neanderthals. The partial skull
(Arago 21) is distorted, but has been reconstructed to display a considerable
facial projection, perhaps somewhat exaggerated. However, there are certainly

other 'primitive' features such as the very strong brow ridge, narrow frontal
and low brain size (probably less than 1200 ml). In these and other features -
the flat face, low broad nose and low orbits - the skull is like a larger version of
Steinheim, but the cheek bones are not hollowed and in this sense are more
Neanderthal-like. The right parietal bone is very like that of Swanscombe, but
with an especially thick area at the back, called an angular torus, often found on




                                                                                                                                  67
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


             Homo erectus skulls. Some workers actually prefer to classify the Arago skull as
             Homo erectus on the basis of the projecting face, small brain size, strong brows
             and angular torus, but the shape of the braincase is also reminiscent of fossils
             like Swanscombe, Steinheim and Petralona, which may be related to the

             ancestors of the Neanderthals.
                Other European sites which have produced comparable fossil remains from
             this period include Montmaurin (France) and Atapuerca (Spain).                The latter
             site has   yielded a large but fragmented sample of parts of skeletons of many
             different individuals, which probably date to over 200,000 years ago. 18 They
             were concentrated in a small chamber deep within a complex of caves, and it is
             still   unclear whether they represent the oldest known evidence of deliberate
             disposal of the dead by early humans or a secondary deposit derived from a
             carnivore     den or    a   natural   catastrophe.     Excavations are continuing        at
             Atapuerca, with the very recent discovery of two well-preserved                     skulls.

             Current estimates put the minimum number of individuals represented at 23,
             and the total number of bones or fragments at over 700.
                The most complete and informative of these middle Pleistocene fossils is the
             cranium from Petralona Cave in Greece. 19 Its exact age is still a matter of great
             controversy, and even its ownership has been the subject of long wrangles in the
             Greek      courts.   Although found        in   i960, a year after the cave itself was
             discovered by local villagers, the significance of the skull was not realized
             internationally until over a decade later. Initially described as a Neanderthal, it
             was     clear to Chris Stringer       on   first   viewing in 197 1 that in   its   unique
             combination of features it was unlike any Neanderthal skull he had ever seen. It
             reminded him strongly of the Broken Hill ('Rhodesian Man') skull with which
             he was familiar from his research at the Natural History Museum in London.
                The Petralona skull is very large and robust, with a thick angular occipital
             bone, carrying a centrally strong transverse torus (pis. 27-29). These occipital
             features are characteristic of the species Homo erectus, yet the overall shape of
             the skull is unlike that of erectus since the braincase is expanded higher up on
             the parietal region, and there is no angular torus at the back corner of the
             parietals. While the brow ridge is consistently thick, as in      Homo erectus, it has a
             double-arched shape above the orbits very like that of Neanderthals. The cheek
             bones are inflated rather than hollowed out and the nose                 is   also rather
             Neanderthal-like in size, although the nasal bones are less projecting. However,
             the middle of the face and nose are not pulled forward as in the Neanderthals.
             Instead, they are somewhat flatter and the large, upper face is also relatively
             broad compared with the narrower shape of Neanderthal skulls. It does not jut
             forward from the braincase, as also is the case in Neanderthals and modern
             humans. The brain volume was about 1,220 ml, at the overlap of the largest
             Homo erectus and smallest Neanderthal specimens, and the cast of the inside of
             the braincase is less narrow and flattened at the front than that of Homo erectus.
                The classification of the Petralona cranium is made difficult by its mosaic
             (mixed) morphology, but the combination of an erectus-\ike back to the skull
             and Neanderthal-like front suggests that Neanderthal characteristics were first




68
                                                                        NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


established in the facial region and brow ridge. However, the Steinheim skull
appears to tell a different story, for there the back of the skull looks more
Neanderthal-like than the front! It may be that the Steinheim face, which is
now distorted after being crushed in the sediments where it lay, was originally
more Neanderthal-like, or it may be that Neanderthal features did not evolve in
an orderly fashion and ancestral populations existed with different combi-
nations of features. It would help if we knew the relative ages of Petralona and
Steinheim, but we cannot say with any certainty which is the older, although we
suspect it   is   Petralona. It has even been suggested that the two could be
approximate contemporaries and represent a male and a female, 20 but the
degree of difference in size, cranial thickness and occipital morphology between
them seems to preclude this interpretation.         When the many bones from
Atapuerca have been assembled and studied, we will be in a much better
position to answer such questions.



Neanderthals on the scene
Until recently, scientists believed that the fossil       humans discovered      in
Ehringsdorf from 1908 onwards dated from the last interglacial stage, about
120,000 years ago. As we saw earlier, however, they are now thought to be
almost twice as old, dating from the interglacial stage 7, some 100,000 years
earlier.   The human remains from this site show certain clear Neanderthal
characteristics, especially at the   back of the    skull, as well as   some more
primitive features (such as thick skull bones, pi. 26). So, based on the new dates,
we currently believe that 'early' Neanderthals had evolved in Europe by
230,000 years ago. 21
  More 'early' Neanderthals are known from the long cold period, stage 6,
which occurred between 180,000 and 130,000 years ago (table p. 47), including
the two Biache partial skulls (pi. 21). 22 These consist of the upper jaw and back
of a probable female skull, and parts of the front of the skull and face of a
probable male. Unfortunately, the two skulls have been studied by rival teams
of French researchers, which does      little   to help our understanding of the
material as a whole. Also from the       same cold stage come the enigmatic
Fontechevade remains which were once a cornerstone of the 'presapiens'
hypothesis, and remains from other French caves e.g. Lazaret and Abri Suard.
   Material dating to the last interglacial proper - 130,000-1 1 5,000 years ago -
from caves such as Bourgeois-Delaunay in France and the Saccopastore gravel
pit in Italy, predominantly display anatomical features characteristic of the late

Neanderthals, although even these remains are not unambiguously Nean-
derthal. Both the Saccopastore skulls, for instance, have a relatively small brain
size like earlier hominids, and the face of Saccopastore 2 resembles a scaled-

down version of the Petralona face. Some of the large body, in both senses of the
words, of material from Krapina in Croatia may also date from this time. 23
  By 70,000 years ago, Europe was in the grip of the last Ice Age, and there is
no clear evidence that the area was inhabited by any people other than




                                                                                            69
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              Neanderthals for the next 30,000 years or so. However, the situation in Africa
              was very different, as we shall see in Chapter 6. The period from 115,000 to
              35,000 years ago is the time of the classic western Neanderthals. These are
             represented not only by remains from the French sites of La Chapelle-aux-
              Saints, La Ferrassie and now Saint-Cesaire, but also by less certainly dated
             finds such as the early ones from Engis and Spy in Belgium, Gibraltar, and the
              original Neander Valley skeleton. Further east there is the material from the
              Amud and Kebara caves in Israel, and the Shanidar skeletons from the
              mountains of northern Iraq. The partial skeletons we referred to in Chapter 1
              almost all come from this time range, and they form the basis for our detailed
              description in Chapter 4. The material available for investigating the origins of
              these much later Neanderthals is, as we have now seen, rather scattered or
              fragmentary. Prior to the Atapuerca discoveries, anthropologists William
              Ho wells and Erik Trinkaus conducted a census of some 19 'early' Neanderthal
              findspots and  showed that the remains must have come from at least 75
              individuals. 24    By comparison,fossils from the 52 sites where the later

              Neanderthals have been found could be added up to a minimum of 200
              individuals. Some of these are represented by just a few teeth while others are
              fairly complete skeletons.




             Some evolutionary models
             Having presented the data on Neanderthal ancestry it is now time to look at
             them in terms of the models of human evolution. As we have indicated, the
             palaeontological record is often obscure, not so much from a lack of information
             but from conflicting ideas about how it should be organized and what explains
             its various patterns. These ideas are what make the subject both endlessly

             fascinating and frustrating for those who expect some sort of final answer.
                There are two concepts at the heart of the evolutionary process which need to
             be examined. The first deals with how we recognize a species. Species are
             generally regarded as the basic units of both       taxonomy (the naming and
             ordering of fossils) and evolutionary change. Although not an evolutionist, the
             eighteenth-century naturalist Carolus Linnaeus produced a system for naming
             species which is still in use today. He proposed that species should be identified
             by an individual name given to a representative specimen, the name to be
             written lower case (and normally italicized). This name would be joined to a
             genus name, written with an initial capital letter, which grouped together
             similar species. Linnaeus' binomial system operates in the case of our species as
              follows: we all belong to the species sapiens ('wise'), with the type being self
             evident to Linnaeus ('know thyself was his comment). Linnaeus placed us
              with some other weird and wonderful species (all now invalid or non-existent)
              in the genus      Homo. As we saw in Chapter 1, today Homo sapiens is usually
              grouped with only two other species in the genus Homo: Homo habilis and Homo
              erectus.There are further groupings of genera into families, ours being
              Hominidae, which also includes our closest fossil relatives, members of the




70
                                                                           NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


Pliocene genera Australopithecus and Paranthropus.
  The methods used to name species raise implications for taxonomy, as well
as what we consider significant in order to understand human evolution.          We
have already seen in this chapter the disputes that attend the interpretation of
some fossils. This is usually due to disagreements over the extent of variation in
a species, and how different fossils should be grouped to accurately reflect the

underlying process of evolutionary change. 25
  The second issue concerns the mechanics of evolutionary change. According
to current scientific thinking, speciation - the process by which new species are

formed - is most commonly a product of the geographic isolation of an
interbreeding group or population. Set out by Ernst Mayr, this geographical
model of speciation is known as allopatry, and in the case of human evolution
may draw on genetic, anatomical and archaeological evidence. 26 Isolation can
be produced either by geographical barriers, such as mountain formation or a
rise   in sea   levels,   or by   new behavioural or morphological obstacles to
interbreeding within a previously continuous population. The multiregional
and replacement models for speciation disagree over the extent of isolation
present in widely dispersed early human populations.
  Multiregional evolution emphasizes continuity in both time and space. 27
According to this model, isolation was never sufficient to allow allopatric
speciation, since genes (the basic units of heredity)          were circulated and
exchanged between all the human populations of the Pleistocene. There could
be no speciation because throughout the last i million years there was really
only one species:     Homo sapiens. This judgment implies that since the first
dispersal of hominids out of Africa a million years or              more ago, all the
observable variation is within this one species. Multiregionalists argue that the
mechanism of change was predominantly behavioural, with anatomy event-
ually evolving to accommodate progressive changes in behaviour that usually
involved improvements in technology. These changes, like the genes,
circulated      around the inhabited world. The different regional lineages
responded in similar ways to these universal forces, directing change globally
towards modern-looking humans. Nevertheless, certain local differences were,
at the same time, being maintained. Selection for specific features in particular

environments kept them in local populations as they gradually became more
modern, e.g. the large noses of Neanderthals were maintained throughout the
transition to modern Europeans, probably in response to the European climate,
and the strong cheek bones of Javanese Homo erectus were maintained in the
transition to modern native Australians, perhaps due to behavioural or dietary
factors.   The mechanism          of interregional gene flow   is    all-important in
multiregional evolution, to continually introduce new characteristics which can
be worked on by local selection, and to counterbalance the tendency to local
specializations     which would increase divergence between geographically
remote populations.
   The population replacement camp has not so far produced a comparable
                                                      28
theoretical dogma to account for evolutionary change.    Certainly, it is argued,




                                                                                               7i
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              Modern           Modern               Modern      Modern
              Africans         Europeans           Asians       Australians




                              Neanderthals
                                                                Ngandong


              African          European            Asian        Indonesian
              cf.   erectus    cf.   erectus       erectus      erectus


              Modern
              Africans



                                                                              j i Two views of the origins of
                                                                              modern humans: the multiregional
                                                                              model (top) and the Out of Africa
                                                                              model. Each interprets the same
                                                                              fossil evidence in a radically
                                                                              different way.   The dashed lines in
                                                                              the multiregional model represent
                                                                              gene flow between regions.


              geographical isolation is implicated in the separation of Far Eastern Homo
              erectus populations         from those in the west generally referred to as 'archaic
              Homo sapiens", and is further implicated in the succeeding north-south
              divergence which led to Neanderthals and Moderns respectively in Europe and
              Africa. Some Neanderthal features can be linked to adaptation to the cold, and
              others to continuing selection for physical strength. For the inferred African
              origin of modern         Homo sapiens, we can guess that behavioural changes lay
              behind the reduction in skeletal robusticity which characterizes modern
              people, but precisely what they were (language? planning depth? technology?)
              remains uncertain. 28
                    The mechanism behind the spread around the world of this modern
              morphology and any accompanying behavioural pattern would have been
              population growth rather than any deliberate pioneering spirit. Successful and
              more intensive use of resources would have demanded a continual quest for
              further resources and new territories, and the gradual extension of such
              boundaries was possible because of these same adaptive abilities, even where
              there were already resident populations of Ancients. Economic competition for
              the available resources would be the mechanism of replacement of one
              population by another where there was coexistence, perhaps coupled in some
              areas with a small degree of interbreeding (in which e.g. a few Neanderthal
              genes would have been taken into the much larger modern human gene pool).
                    Such processes would have taken place over many millennia, and probably
              occurred in fits and starts in the face of continuing climatic change throughout
              the late Pleistocene. Such climatic changes would sometimes have aided the
              process of expansion - by extending open country and eliminating geographi-
              cal barriers such as water or ice - and sometimes hindered it, by re-establishing

              old barriers or creating new ones, e.g. deserts or thick forests. However, the
              cyclical nature of such environmental changes meant that the early Moderns
              were continually being offered new opportunities for dispersal and adaptation.




72
                                CHAPTER 4

                    Portrait of a Neanderthal




About 120,000 years ago we find a great change in the quality of the fossil
record. After this time archaeologists have available a       number of fairly
complete skeletons, both of Neanderthals and Moderns. Maybe this is because
the early   humans in Europe and western Asia developed a new method of
dealing with their dead around this time. Hitherto they may not have cared
about their dead or, perhaps, as is possible in the case of Atapuerca in Spain,
they merely abandoned the bodies in a cave. As we will see in Chapter 7, the
question of whether the Neanderthals ritually buried their dead is an extremely
complex one. Carnivores, for instance, may have played a decisive role in
determining the presence or lack of reasonably complete skeletal remains. But
whatever the explanation for the improvement in the skeletal record, we are
now in the fortunate position of having a number of skeletons of Neanderthal
men, women and children to study. There are more of these than we have yet
found of any earlier people or of their contemporaries from elsewhere in the
world, who either did not bury their dead or interred them in places much less
suitable for the preservation of bones than the caves of Europe and southwest
Asia.   The sample of Neanderthal skeletons is still not large: about a dozen
tolerably   complete examples of skulls and limb bones found together.
However, new discoveries are reported all the time, including in the last decade
the most complete trunk and upper limb skeleton of a Neanderthal yet found,
from Kebara Cave in Israel, and perhaps the youngest in terms of antiquity,
from the Saint-Cesaire rockshelter in France.
  Putting the Neanderthal finds together, we can build up a picture of what
these people looked like, what they were capable of doing with their bodies,
how they developed physically, what diseases they suffered from and, in rare
cases, what might have caused their deaths. Using data from modern people,
we can estimate the height and weight of Neanderthals, reconstruct how their
muscles worked, tell the size and shape of their brains (but not how well they
functioned compared with our own), and make educated guesses about how
well they might have spoken. It is even becoming possible to tell how quickly
Neanderthal children grew up, and there has been speculation about the length
of pregnancy in Neanderthal women - could it have been longer than in women
today?
   Starting with the head, we shall now make a tour of the Neanderthal body
looking at the way palaeoanthropologists are trying to piece together the jigsaw-
like   evidence, sometimes from scraps of bone, to build a portrait of these
remarkable people who lived from over 120,000 to 35,000 years ago.      1




                                                                                    73
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                        An Excursion Around the Sites of the Neanderthal World


                     Neanderthal sites generally fall into two categories: those, mainly
                     caves and rockshelters, which have yielded actual Neanderthal
                     remains -sometimes even complete skeletons; and those, largely
                     open and rockshelter sites, which have produced evidence
                     primarily of Neanderthal material culture (e.g. the Mousterian
                     stone tools traditionally thought to be Neanderthal handiwork) and
                     only few fossil finds.
                       Within the Neanderthal world, the two main areas in which
                     skeletons and stone tools have frequently been found together are
                     southwest France and the Middle East. The major sites in the west
                     are the rockshelters of La Ferrassie, Le Moustier and La Quina.
                     These have been dug over many years, and their stratigraphic
                     sections are still important for unravelling the changes in Mouster-
                     ian assemblages as discussed by Francois Bordes (Chapter 3). The
                     surviving deposits at all three sites have been re-excavated in
                     recent years to clarify climatic and chronological sequences, and at
                     La Quina to recover information about the spatial use of the
                     rockshelter.
                       In the Middle East, the caves of Mount Carmel outside Haifa have

                    been excavated on several occasions, particularly Tabun. And in
                    Iraq, the deeply stratified and rich deposits of Shanidar Cave have
                    proved immensely important for investigating Neanderthal ana-
                    tomy. Current work at Kebara Cave and Amud, combined with the
                    application of an absolute dating programme, has helped to clarify
                    the relationship in this area between the earliest anatomically
                    modern humans and the Neanderthals.
                       Sites with such rich archaeological deposits and fossil remains,
                    however, are rare. Surrounding them are many open sites and




              The Neanderthal head and brain
              From the time of the original Neander Valley find in 1856, as we saw in Chapter
              1, anatomists recognized that they   were dealing with a large-brained creature,
              whose skull and brain shape differed from our own.


              Brains and brows
              The Neanderthal skull was long, but peculiarly flattened on top, a feature
              which we now know to have been common in early humans, and one which the
              Neanderthals inherited from their Homo erectus ancestors. Also inherited from
              them was the bar of bone above the eye sockets, but in the Neanderthals - as in
              the earlier Petralona skull - the eyebrow ridges were formed into two arches
              and were lightened internally by large air spaces called the frontal sinuses.
              Although Neanderthal brow ridges were strong even in some females (such as




74
                                                                        PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




       rockshelters (known in France as abris) which have yielded just
       stone tools of Middle Palaeolithic form or much more fragmentary
       fossil material. One of the most important sites from a chronological
       viewpoint is Combe Grenal in southwest France. Others include the
       Grotte Vaufrey and La Chaise, where more complete fossil remains
       have been found.
          In other parts of the Neanderthal world, artifact sites are rarely so

       prolific. In centralEurope, sites in southern Germany such as the
       Bockstein and Klaussenische Caves have produced only small
       assemblages of stone tools. This is also the pattern in Hungary at
       the open-air site of Erd, near Budapest, and in sites from the north
       European, Russian and Ukrainian plains such as Salzgitter Leben-
       stedt and Molodova. The last site has seen large-scale excavations
       of multiple horizons and the recovery not only of substantial
       numbers of artifacts but also the remains of structures (Chapter 9).
         Sites rich in artifacts can be found in northern Europe, but they
       are rare. On the island of Jersey, large collections of Middle
       Palaeolithic artifacts were excavated at the headland site of La
       Cotte de St Brelade. Here an impressive sequence starts 250,000
       years ago and continues through to the last glaciation. The piles of
       mammoth and rhino bones found in two levels have been
       interpreted as separate hunting episodes in which small herds
       were stampeded over the cliff (Chapter 7).
         There are many Mousterian sites in southern Europe: in the
       Iberian peninsula, France,   Italy, Croatia and Greece. The Nean-

       derthal remains at these sites are often highly fragmentary as at
       Devil's Tower (Gibraltar), Hortus (France), Guattari (Italy), Krapina
       and Vindija (Croatia).




the Tabun woman) and were already developing in children of about eight (e.g.
the Teshik Tash boy), they were nevertheless considerably reduced at the sides
compared with those of Homo erectus or their European precursors. The exact
                                                        2
function of the brow ridge is still a matter of dispute, and one of the most
popular explanations (absorbing stresses and strains from the action of the jaws
and teeth) has not been supported by experiments using monkey                     skulls.

Perhaps it provided a signal, even a threat, to others, or maybe it just acted to fill
a vulnerable space above the eye sockets. Whatever the reason, the size of the
brow ridge was less important to Neanderthals than to earlier humans. This is
also reflected in the large size of their frontal sinuses. In Homo erectus the brow
ridges mainly consisted of compact bone, but by the time of middle Pleistocene
humans such as those represented by the Petralona and Broken Hill skulls, the
brow ridge was mostly an empty structure, a trend which the Neanderthals
continued.




                                                                                               75
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL


braincase wider at middle or bottom                                                                           shorter, flatter parietal bones
                                                            low forehead (flatter frontal bone)

                                                                                                                       voluminous, long, wide
                                                                                                                            and low braincase




high rounded
orbits


high, wide and
                                                                                                                                shorter bulging
voluminous nose
                                                                                                                                 occipital bone

inflated cheeks                                                                                                          with suprainiac fossa
(no canine fossa)
                                                                                                                larger juxtamastoid eminence

large front teeth                                                                                         smaller mastoid process


                                                                                                  retromolar gap behind 3rd molar


                                                                                     mental foramen (hole) usually under 1 st molar




                        Large noses
                        Also important to the Neanderthals were their noses, which must have been
                        remarkably prominent. In fact, in some cases the nasal bones jutted out nearly
                        horizontally below the brows. Both the internal and external size of their nasal
                        cavities      was large. This has led to suggestions that they used their noses to
                        warm and humidify the cold and dry air of their Ice Age environment. It has
                        even been suggested that the Neanderthal nose was positioned far forward in
                        order to distance the incoming cold contents of the nasal cavity as much as
                        possible from the delicate and vulnerable brain tissues. 3 In comparison with
                        earlier fossil skulls, those of the Neanderthals do indeed have relatively longer

                        noses, although the wide breadth is consistent with that of possible ancestral
                        forms such as the ones from Steinheim and Petralona. Compared with modern
                        skulls,    the Neanderthal combination of great nose length and breadth                                     is

                        unusual. Modern cold-adapted people, such as the Inuit of the Arctic, tend to
                        have long but narrow nasal openings, while short, broad noses are mostly found
                        in   warm conditions. This suggests that the Neanderthal nasal form might
                        reflect a unique combination of the effects of low temperatures and humidity on

                        an archaically modelled           skull. Finally,       it   has even been proposed that the
                        Neanderthal nose was actually a means oflosing heat generated by a very active
                                      4
                        life style,       but it is difficult to imagine that the Neanderthals were more active or
                        liable to heat stress than earlier or contemporaneous tropical humans who did

                        not have such large noses. (However, overheating and sweating, followed by
                        freezing, would have been harmful in cold conditions.)


                        Neanderthal teeth and roots
                        The Neanderthals must have had special uses for their front teeth, for these are
                        very large and often heavily worn compared with those of their probable




76
                                                                                         PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL


                                       longer curved parietal bones                                     braincase widest higher up
voluminous, long, narrower
and higher braincase
                                                                                                                       brow ridge
                                                                                                                 smaller or absent
                                                                                                               (especially at sides)




                                                                                                                    lower, squarer
                                                                                                                             orbits

                                                                                                                   lower, narrower
                                                                                                                              nose

                                                                                                                      canine fossa
                                                                                                                 (hollowed cheeks)


                                                                                                                smaller front teeth

more prominent mastoid process
(especially in males)


      no retromolar gap behind 3rd molar

              mental foramen (hole) usually under premolars

         32    (Left) The Chapelle-aux-Saints skull, indicating Neanderthal features. (Above) The skull of
         anatomically modern Cro-Magnon 1, with the features characteristic of Homo sapiens labelled.



         ancestors. The large size of their front teeth is particularly notable considering
         that the rest of their dentition was relatively reduced in size (although still
         larger than the modern average). It is thought these teeth may have been used
         as a vice to hold objects other than just food items. Evidence to support this idea
         has come from studies of the peculiarly heavy and rounded wear patterns and
         damage to the front teeth: they bear microscopic traces of material, presumably
         both animal and vegetable, pulled outwards across the clenched teeth. Such
         rounded wear has even been observed on a Neanderthal milk incisor from the
         French cave of La Quina, showing that such activities began early in life. 5
              Additional evidence of the importance of the front teeth in Neanderthals and
         their predecessors has            come from other microscopic studies of the front
         surfaces of these teeth. In an early sample (Atapuerca)                   and several later
         Neanderthals from Europe, Iraq and Israel unidirectional scratches have been
         observed, which suggest that something held in the teeth was being cut with
         stone tools. 6 When these tools penetrated the material in question, they left a
         tell-tale scratch mark on the teeth which reveals the direction of cut, indicating

         that the tool was usually held in the right hand. Along with data on the brain
         shape of Neanderthals and the stronger development of their right arms, this
         implies that - like modern humans - most Neanderthals were right-handed.
         Furthermore, there is evidence that this behaviour started early, in both senses,
         since the characteristic scratches are present on a child's milk canine from the
         middle Pleistocene site of Atapuerca. It is possible to see the importance of the
         front      teeth   as   a   general feature of early         human behaviour which was
         accentuated in the Neanderthals.
              Like the front teeth of their ancestors and certain modern peoples (especially
         those from eastern Asia), the upper incisors of the Neanderthals were built up




                                                                                                                                 77
    PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



                         by ridges on the sides. This trait is known as 'shovelled' or shovel-shape, while
                         the back teeth often had additional cusps.
                           One of the most unusual aspects of many Neanderthal back teeth is the
                         presence of taurodont or 'bull-toothed' roots, as         first   recognized in the
                         Neanderthal teeth from Jersey and Krapina in Croatia. The odd shape of these
                         roots is produced by a delayed turning-in of the base of the roots during their

  non-taurodont tooth
                         growth, so that they are poorly- or unseparated from each other. The pulp
                         cavity inside the tooth is also expanded into the large roots. This feature may be
                         related to the heavy wear suffered by Neanderthal teeth, since a tooth with
                         unseparated roots can continue to operate as an intact chewing surface even
                         when worn through the crown. Taurodontism is found frequently in some
                         modern populations such as the Inuit, and the unusual root growth responsible
                         for the condition in Neanderthals also seems common in people with extra               X
                         (female) chromosomes.

    taurodont tooth
                         Jaws and faces
33 Schematic cross       Either side of the Neanderthal nose, the cheek bones were swept back, giving a
section of a non-
                         streamlined appearance to the middle of the face, and the cheeks were inflated
taurodont and a
taurodont tooth          rather than hollowed. This morphology is unlike that of both Homo erectus and
illustrating the         modern humans, but inflated cheeks are found in earlier European fossils such
difference between the
                         as Petralona. As the whole middle of the face was pulled out in relation to the
sizes of the two pulp
cavities.                sides, the upper jaw and teeth it contained were also pulled forward relative to

                         the cheek bones and the back of the skull.         Not surprisingly, the forward
                         position of the teeth was reflected in the unusual shape of the lower jaw or
                         mandible, with a space or retromolar gap behind the wisdom teeth before the
                         bone of the mandible swept up towards the jaw joint (pi. 40).
                           All these features distinguish the Neanderthals          from    earlier   and    later

                         peoples, as well as from their contemporaries in Africa and the Far East, and
                         many palaeoanthropologists have viewed the characteristics as evolutionary
                         specializations related either to cold adaptation or to the special role of the front
                         teeth.   However, some of those who favour the model of regional continuity
                         regard the unusual shape of the Neanderthal face not as specialized, but as a
                         logical intermediate stage between the big, projecting faces of earlier hominids,
                         and the small faces of modern Europeans, which are tucked in under the
                         braincase. According to this view, the musculature of the outer cheek region
                         was reduced in the evolution of the Neanderthals, leading to a change in the
                         orientation of the cheek bones relative to the still projecting front of the face;
                         this resulted in the characteristic swept-back appearance of the Neanderthal

                         cheeks. In time the front of the face itself became less projecting, perhaps due to
                         the decreased importance of the front teeth, and this contributed to the
                         appearance of the modern European facial shape. 7
                           However, supporters of the multiregional continuity model                   for    the
                         Neanderthals have a problem to explain. The two-stage reduction they favour,
                         which led to the modern European face via the Neanderthals, was unique to the
                         Neanderthal area. Human evolution in other regions seems to have proceeded




    78
                                                                                                     cranium



                                                                                                     facial bones


                                                                                                     mandible (jaw)
                              large and wide rib cage
                                                                                                     clavicle

                              long clavicle

                                                                                                     scapula
                              wide scapula with more
                              muscle attachments along                                               sternum
                              rear edge
                                                                                                     rib

                              large shoulder joint                                                   humerus

                                                                                                     vertebra

                                                                                                     pelvis
                              large elbow joint
                                                                                                     sacrum
                              bowed and short forearm                                                superior pubic
                                                                                                     ramus
                              wide hips
                                                                                                     radius

                              large hip joint, rotated outwards                                      ulna
                                                                                                     carpals
                                                                                                     metacarpals
                              hand with strong grip
                              and wide fingertips                                                    phalanges

                              long, thin superior pubic ramus
                                                                                                     femur
                              rounded, curved and
                              thick-walled femur shaft
                                                                                                     patella


                              large and thick patella

                                                                                                     tibia


                                                                                                     fibula
                              short, flattened and thick-walled tibia




                              large ankle joint
                                                                                                     tarsals

                                                                                                     metatarsals
                              wide and strong toe bones                                              phalanges


34 Here the skeleton of a typical male Neanderthal (left) is contrasted with that of a modern
male. The Neanderthal has a much more robust and stocky physique than his modern counterpart.




directly from the robust faces of earlier humans to the modern face, through a
single process of reducing the overall size of the face in concert with its gradual
retraction under the braincase. 8       We therefore believe            it is   more probable that
the latter process was responsible for the evolution of all modern human faces,
and that this facial morphology then supplanted that of the Neanderthals in
Europe.


Chins and shelves
We have already mentioned the forward position of Neanderthal teeth in the
jaw and some of the characteristics of these teeth, but there are some other
features of the Neanderthal mandible which should also be explained.                          One




                                                                                                                    79
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                                          Neanderthal Geography


                     The Neanderthals occupied many environments within middle and
                     late Pleistocene Europe. We have seen in Chapter 2 the range of
                     habitats and animal species they lived with and exploited, but
                     reconstructing past population densities and other demographic
                     patterns is more difficult. What we can see is that Neanderthals
                     were not capable until after 60,000 years ago of colonizing the very
                     seasonal environments of the Russian plains or indeed the high
                     mountain areas. Their optimal habitats were in the western plains
                     (where seasonal variation      in   temperature was moderated, as
                     today, by oceanic climates) and on upland plateaux of modest
                     elevation. In both environments - either on the northern plains of
                     France, Belgium, England and Germany, or in the sheltered valleys
                     which dissect the rolling uplands of southwest France, southern
                     Germany and central Europe - sites were located to exploit the
                     large, diverse herds of animals upon which the Neanderthals
                     depended. The long sequences at sites such as Le Moustier or
                     Combe Grenal in the Dordogne, rich in stone tools, point to the
                     repeated use of such localities over many centuries and millennia.
                        If we take a north-south transect from England to Iberia, we can


                     see that such rich assemblages in multi-level cave sites occur more
                     frequently in the southern and Mediterranean regions of the
                     continent. While this pattern is difficult to translate into numbers of
                     people or density of population, what it does indicate is a long-term
                      signature' of past settlement. We should not be surprised that the
                     general trend is one of increasing population and greater continuity
                     of settlement in the animal-rich southern latitudes of the continent;




              concerns the hole or foramen which lies on the inside of the rear upright
              portion, the ascending ramus. This mandibular foramen carries a nerve which
              runs to the front of the jaw, but what is unusual is the bony lip which is formed
              across the foramen in two out of every three Neanderthal jaws examined. This
                                  human and ape jaws, as well as in earlier human fossils, 9
              lip is rare in modern

              although it does seem to be present in about a quarter of Cro-Magnon jaws.
              The function of this bony lip seems to be related to the strong pull of the
              sphenomandibular ligament which runs from the ear region down to the
              vicinity of the mandibular foramen. In Neanderthals, and presumably in some
              Cro-Magnons as well, this ligament must have played an important role in
              holding the jaw steady during strong muscle actions.
                One other feature of the Neanderthal jaw worth mentioning is the slight
              development of a chin in some Neanderthal specimens, particularly the later
              ones. The front of the jaw is a weak area in mammals, since this is where the two
              original halves of the jaw meet during growth, and eventually fuse together.




80
                                                                    PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




       this trend is  repeated in the Middle East according to data from
       Israel and the Negev Desert.    We suspect from these patterns that
       Neanderthals in northern parts of the continent tended to abandon
       and re-occupy regions more frequently than their southern counter-
       parts, as climate affected the abundance and predictability of
       animal resources; Neanderthal populations in this part of the world
       were therefore likely to ebb and flow. The data from open sites such
       as Erd in Hungary and Molodova on the Dnestr River in the Ukraine
       are more difficult to quantify and compare by means of such
       transects. But a glance at the distribution map of Mousterian sites
       (commonly associated with the Neanderthals) shows a reduction in
       population at sites in the southern and western parts of Europe, as
       continental climates start to present problems for survival.
         What therefore emerges from this simple survey is that there
       were two demographic centres for the Neanderthals - western
       Europe and the Middle East - a conclusion supported by evidence
       both from Neanderthal remains and from the density of artifacts and
       the richness of cave and open site sequences. These centres are
       the loci of the key sites and classic sequences e.g. La Quina, Pech
       de I'Aze and Combe Grenal in the west, and Mount Carmel, Amud,
       Jabrud and Shubbabiq in the Middle East. Surrounding these
       areas, which we assume had near continuous occupation, was a
       hinterland of more intermittent occupation, where expansion took
       place at climatically favourable times but - when faced with a
       thinning of resources - populations became locally extinct rather
       than intensified to maintain a presence.




When the muscles at the base and sides of the skull work on the rear of the lower
jaw, especially in skulls where the braincase is large as it is in Neanderthals and
modern humans, the front of the jaw is put under constant pressure and needs
to be reinforced. In apes, this reinforcement is achieved by the development of

the 'simian shelf, a bony shelf across the front of the base of the jaw. In early
hominids the strengthening is accomplished by the mandibular torus, an
internal ridge of bone which runs across the back of the symphysis, while in
modern humans and some Neanderthals the bony ridge forms on the outside of
the lower jaw to form a chin.


Brain size
The shape of the Neanderthal braincase was directly related to the shape of the
brain itself. Both were long, low and flattened in comparison with those of
modern people, and more similar to those of Homo erectus and the middle
Pleistocene ancestors of the Neanderthals. But in contrast to earlier and many




                                                                                           81
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              present-day humans, the Neanderthals were very large-brained, the breadth of
              the brain being especially developed.
                 We know this detail because, although we do not have a fossilized
              Neanderthal brain, we can make a cast in silicon rubber from the inside of a
              Neanderthal skull and recreate the general proportions of the brain                     it

              contained. While the largest       Homo erectus brains were about 1,250 ml (2
              imperial pints) and modern brains average about 1,200-1,500 ml in volume,
              female Neanderthal brains were about 1,300 ml and those of males about 1,600
              ml, extending to 1,740 ml in the Amud man. 10 Curiously, a large brain size was
              also characteristic of the earliest modern people of Europe and Asia. The brains
              of both the Neanderthal 'Old Man' of La Chapelle-aux-Saints and the 'Old
              Man' of Cro-Magnon were over 1,600 ml in volume.
                 The significance of these large brains has long been disputed (Chapter 1). In
              the earlier years of this century it was believed that the Neanderthal brain was
              markedly inferior to a modern brain despite its great size, because it was larger
              at the   back (the occipital lobes) - supposedly the location of the 'baser'
              functions - and smaller at the front (the frontal lobes), thought to be the seat of
              reasoned      belief.   But knowledge of brain functions was then even more
              rudimentary than it is today. Experts such as Sir Arthur Keith and Sir Grafton
              Elliot Smith believed they could recognize all manner of 'primitive' features in
              the Piltdown brain reconstruction, as well as in those of Neanderthals. Since we
              now know that the fraudulent Piltdown braincase actually came from a human
              skull which was only a few hundred years old, these so-called primitive features
              were largely in the eyes of the beholders. Furthermore, as both these great
              anatomists have at one time or another been implicated in the Piltdown forgery,
              we feel that to classify brains as primitive according to their external features is
              equally questionable scientifically.
                 As far as Neanderthal brains are concerned, the pendulum has swung to the
              other extreme, partly in reaction to previous errors of interpretation and partly
              in recognition of our present ignorance. Thus many palaeoanthropologists are

              now reluctant to judge the quality of Neanderthal brains at all, or are content to
              assume that there was little intellectual difference from modern humans.
              Opinions tend to fluctuate. Carleton Coon, for instance, dressed Boule's
              Neanderthal in a hat and coat to emphasize the similarities with modern people
              (fig. 11),   but later described the Neanderthal brain as having 'a luxuriance of
              gorilloid features'.
                 The large size of the Neanderthal brain now tends to be seen as a correlate of
                                                                       11
              their large body mass (the 'meat head' hypothesis             ),   and perhaps also of the
              cool environments in which many of them lived. Brain sizes in modern humans
              are related in a general        way   to both   body   size        and the environmental
              temperature in which a population lives. These two factors are not independent
              of each other. Populations living in higher (cold) latitudes tend to be both larger
              brained and larger bodied, probably because in the past such physiques were
              selected for efficient heat conservation, than those living in lower (warmer)
              latitudes.




82
                                                                                PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



   For all the recent swing of the pendulum, however, the incontrovertible
differences in shape and proportion between Neanderthal and modern brains
are certainly of unknown significance.                We now know that people can survive
adequately with extensive damage to some areas of the brain (brains deformed
by disease or the cultural practice of head binding can assume very peculiar
shapes, yet seemingly function normally), but very badly with only limited
damage to certain key areas. It is evident that some parts of the brain are
specialized for particular functions, such as those concerned with the senses,
while other parts have an organizational role.
   The areas which interlink and integrate the functions of the different parts of
the brain are obviously key elements of intelligence in modern humans, but we
know nothing - and probably will never know anything - in either quantitative
or qualitative terms about such areas in the Neanderthal brain.                       So it is
dangerous to assume that brains of different shape and proportions must
necessarily be different in quality. This is not to say, however, that there were
no quantitative or qualitative differences between Neanderthal and modern
human brains, only that the evidence of endocranial casts is insufficient to
judge, and we may be better off looking for evidence of brain capabilities in the
archaeological record (Chapter 9).
  An additional conclusion we can draw from endocranial casts is that
Neanderthals and early modern humans - like people today - had cerebral
dominance,        i.e.   the right and    left   halves of the brain were specialized for
particular functions. In living people, there is a clear statistical relationship
between having a larger occipital lobe on the left side, a larger frontal lobe on
the right side,and right-handedness. Most Neanderthal and early modern
human endocranial casts display a similar pattern, indicating the predominance
of right-handers even in prehistoric times 12 - a conclusion reinforced, as we
have seen, by their stronger right arms, by the cut marks on several
Neanderthal front teeth, and by evidence from the resharpening of stone tools
(Chapter 5).


Skull shape
Moving from the inside of the skull to the outside, the large size of the occipital
lobes at the back of the Neanderthal brain                    is   reflected in the   common
occurrence of a bulging occipital bone, often called an occipital chignon or bun,
as in the Victorian hair-style.               There were also some oddities in the neck
musculature of Neanderthals which are shown by one or more pits (known as
suprainiac fossa) in the middle of the occipital bone. In contrast, it is more usual
in modern skulls to have a raised point of bone, the occipital protuberance, to

mark the central limit of muscle attachments. Additionally, at the lower edges
of the Neanderthal occipital bone - inside the ear region - there was usually a
prominent crest known as the juxtamastoid eminence or the occipitomastoid
         13
crest.        This may reflect the great importance of muscles running to the lower
jaw, which played a part in the special vice-like functions of the front teeth. The
prominence of            this   crest   was    also   accentuated by the fact that      many




                                                                                                       83
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                                                        occipital
                                                        bone




                 mastoid crest               large
                                                                           suprainiac fossa
                                            juxtamastoid
                   mastoid process                                                            occipital torus
                                            eminence


              35 The braincase of the Neanderthal skull from La Ferrassie, showing some of the key features
              that characterize the Neanderthals as a group.




              Neanderthal skulls have relatively small points of bone, mastoid processes, in
              the ear region. In modern people it is usual for the mastoid processes to point
              down well below the level of the juxtamastoid eminence; this even occurs in
              females, where the mastoid processes are relatively small. But the juxtamastoid
              development of Neanderthals usually dwarves that of the mastoid in both
              sexes.



              Neanderthal growth
              For a long time there has been speculation about the way Neanderthals
              developed during and after childhood, compared with modern people.
              Humans are different from the great apes in that we have much slower growth
              and development before maturity. For example, we take nearly twice as long to
              reach puberty. It has been assumed that this extended period of growth enables
              the developing child to absorb the complexities of its native culture through the
              medium of language, in order for the child to be adequately prepared for a
              human way of life.
                Because we are different from all the apes in this important respect, it seems
              highly likely that the human growth pattern evolved after the last evolutionary
              split from the apes. This would have been some time within the last 5 million

              years. But was the extended human growth pattern developed soon after the
              evolutionary split from the African apes, or was it more gradual or late in its
              appearance? Whatever the answer, we might expect the Neanderthals to be
              quite similar to modern people in their developmental pattern, since they are
              clearly closely related to us,         and are    late    on the evolutionary timescale.
              Moreover, the extended human growth pattern might also be necessary for the
              growth of a large brain, and this the Neanderthals certainly had. The only way
              that Neanderthals could be very different                from us would be if the human
              growth pattern was in fact uniquely evolved by anatomically modern humans
              during the last 150,000 years. There are now techniques, some of them still




84
                                                                      PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



controversial,   which allow us   to estimate the age at death of prehistoric

children. By comparing their maturity with those of modern children of the
same age, we can begin to build up a picture of similarities and differences in
development.
  Hitherto, reconstructions of hominid growth patterns have been made using
modern human comparative data; but such models are based on the assumption
that hominids were like us in their basic biology. A new method of age
estimation, however, based on the microscopic counting of incremental (i.e.
periodically added) lines on the surface enamel of the front teeth, allows an age
                                                                           14
assessment which is independent of any preconceived model of growth.            These
incremental lines or perikymata are the dental equivalents of tree rings, but
they form at a rate of about one a week rather than one a year. Where a whole
tooth crown is preserved unworn, it also preserves the record of its growth in its
perikymata. And if a root has been formed, its growth too must be estimated
and added to the crown development time. This means that for a tooth formed
soon after birth, such as an incisor,      it   is   possible to estimate the total
development time. The death of a child, therefore, is indicated by the cessation
of tooth development, and its age at death can thus be estimated.
  The perikymata aging technique has already challenged the conventional
view of growth in australopithecines (the early African hominids of 1.5-4
million years ago), which held that they were essentially human in their
development. The technique distinguished the robust australopithecines from
their more gracile counterparts, but neither show a modern human type of
extended growth. Indications are that both the earliest known australopithe-
cine, A. afarensis, and the later gracile form A. africanus, were very apelike in
maturing dentally at nearly twice the rate of human children - thus the first
known australopithecine fossil, the Taung child, would have been closer to
three years of age at death than to the six years commonly estimated. 15


Precocious children?
So far the technique has only been applied in detail to one Neanderthal fossil -
that of the Devil's Tower child from Gibraltar which preserves an unerupted,
but totally exposed, upper incisor, complete with a beautiful set of perikymata.
The child's remains probably date from about 50,000 years ago and consist of
parts of the skull, indicative of a very large brain size, and a lower jaw and part
of the upper jaw, both containing teeth. Conventional aging techniques, based
on the state of eruption and development of the teeth as well as the form of the
skull bones compared with those of modern children, suggested an age at death
of around five years.
  One expert on Neanderthal children, Ann-Marie Tillier, re-examined the
Devil's Tower bones and teeth, and surprisingly concluded that the remains of
two different children were mixed up in the material. 16 Most of the bones and
jaws did indeed belong to a five-year-old, as already generally believed.
However, Tillier believed the temporal bone (which includes the ear region) to
be less mature than the rest, belonging instead to a three-year-old.




                                                                                             85
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



                 Unfortunately, this conclusion could not be tested in the most straightfor-
              ward way, by seeing if the bones would fit together as a single skull, because the
              different bones were not sufficiently complete. So Chris Stringer and his
              colleagues set out to test Tillier's hypothesis by applying the perikymata aging
              technique to the unerupted central incisor of the upper jaw (or, rather, an exact
              surface replica of it). The result clearly suggested an age at death of three to four
                       17
              years.        Since this is compatible with Tillier's estimate for the temporal bone,
              there is no longer any need to assume that more than one child is represented.
              The young age of the Devil's Tower child makes its brain size - estimated at
              about 1400 ml, close to the modern adult average - even more remarkable. The
              development of the child's molar teeth would also have been well-advanced for
              a three-year-old. This specimen thus suggests that Neanderthal children grew

              up quite fast.
                 This idea is supported by other data. For example, it has been observed that
              Neanderthal children had a greater robusticity and muscularity in their limb
              bones than their modern counterparts. This is noticeable even at an age before
              heavy exercise could have had any influence, indicating that it was originally
              inherited, even if later activity subsequently added to the effect. From the skull
              and dentition, some palaeoanthropologists had previously suggested that there
              was precocious dental development in Neanderthals, but it is only with the
              advent of independent age estimators that this idea can be properly tested.
              Further application of these methods to the study of Neanderthal children will
              teach us much more about their biology, but it is already evident that at any
              given age, they were likely to have been more robust, lower-skulled, larger-
              faced and as large or perhaps larger-brained than comparable modern children.


              The hip and pelvis
              Another unusual aspect of the Neanderthals concerns the front of the pelvis.
              Regardless of age or sex, the upper front part of the Neanderthal pelvis (known
              as the superior pubic ramus) shows an unusual structure. The superior pubic

              ramus is long, thin, and relatively flattened (pi. 41). Very unusually, therefore,
              this part of the Neanderthal skeleton actually seems more gracile or lightly built

              than that of modern humans. Several theories have been advanced to explain
              this feature, none of them entirely satisfactory. It was suggested, for example,

              that the unusual pubic length would have increased the volume of the birth
              canal by up to 20 per cent, allowing Neanderthal women to give birth to larger
              and more mature babies, which might have been advantageous for infant
              survival in a difficult environment. An increase in the size of babies could have
              resulted either from faster foetal growth over the same gestation length, or from
              normal growth over a longer period in the uterus, perhaps even as long as a
                      18
              year.
                Recent research on modern populations, however, has come up with another
              explanation. In modern populations such as the Arctic Inuit, where large heads
              are combined with small stature, it appears that in some ways they show a form
              approaching the Neanderthal pelvic condition. But these populations show no




86
                                                                                 PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                                                                                   margin of pelvic inlet
                                                                                  modern human




                                                                                  margin of pelvic inlet
                                                                                  Kebara Neanderthal




                                                         pubic ramus modern human

                                                         pubic ramus Kebara Neanderthal


j6 Superior view of the reconstructed Neanderthal pelvis from Kebara Cave in Israel. Like
other Neanderthal examples, the pubic bone of the Kebara pelvis is relatively thinner and longer
than it is in modern people. The most likely explanation for this pubic lengthening lies in
differences between the locomotion of Neanderthals and modern people, rather than differences in
gestation period or other developmental factors as some scholars have suggested.




noticeable difference in gestation length or foetal growth rates from other
modern groups, which suggests that the trend towards having a longer pubic
ramus in the Inuit and other similar peoples is because the mother is small and
the baby's head relatively large. Perhaps the Neanderthals merely displayed an
extreme version of this condition. 19 Their women were certainly relatively
short in stature (see below) and their babies' heads were likely to have been
large.

   Unfortunately, this appealing idea is also unlikely to be the answer, because
the most prominent cases of Neanderthal pubic ramus lengthening are found in
big Neanderthal males such as the one from Kebara, which hardly supports the
idea that it is something especially connected with female reproduction! The
theory is further invalidated by the fact that young Neanderthals, well before
puberty, show pubic bone lengthening20             .   The Kebara adult pelvis - the most
complete Neanderthal pelvis yet found - also refutes such ideas since, although
   shaped differently from a modern one, it has no greater internal volume.
it is

The pubic bone differences serve primarily to widen the pelvis at the front,
rotating the blades of the pelvis outwards along with the hip joint. This has
little   effect   on the depth of the pelvis, front to back, which would be the
important factor in altering the size of the birth canal.
  If reproductive differences were not responsible for the peculiar pubic bone
anatomy of the Neanderthals, what could have been? Yoel Rak, who produced
the first detailed description of the Kebara pelvis, returns to the old idea - now
generally out of favour - that Neanderthals walked differently from modern
humans, and in this respect were retaining ancestral features of hip joint




                                                                                                            87
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              function which   modern humans have lost. 21      We shall discuss some other
              aspects of the pelvic anatomy later.


              Care for the elderly
              As well as speculation about the early stages of growth in Neanderthals, new
              data are also being gathered and interpreted about the other end of the life
              cycle: old age.   There is continuing controversy about the applicability of
              methods used to estimate the age at death of elderly individuals in samples of
              skeletons from the recent past, so there are even greater problems in applying
              these procedures to fossils. Nevertheless, new or more sophisticated methods
              of aging older individuals by detailed studies of the surface of the pelvis and the
              microscopic examination of growth in the thigh bone (femur) have allowed the
              age at death of some of the older Neanderthal individuals to be estimated. One
              particular study has reassessed the age at death of important specimens from
              Iraq and France. 22 The surprising fact that has emerged from this work is that
              it is difficult to find a Neanderthal estimated at more than 40 years old at death;

              this includes the so-called 'old man' of La Chapelle-aux-Saints, in spite of his

              injuries, tooth loss and joint disease.

                  Of the entire Neanderthal sample, apparently fewer than 10 per cent were
              aged over 35. The comparable figure in recent non-industrialized groups,
              such as hunter-gatherers and tribal agriculturalists, is about 50 per cent. Thus
              few Neanderthals were likely to have reached beyond middle age in modern
              terms. Two important consequences of this would have been reduced
              information derived from long-term experience, and a greater           number of
              'orphan' children.
                Significant survival beyond the reproductive age seems to be a special human
              characteristic not   found   in   other great apes. Such longevity requires a
              particular sort of adaptation in which individuals change their roles as they get
              older and become more dependent on others (particularly younger relatives)
              for their food and survival. It is possible that such post-reproductive survival
              was a characteristic of Cro-Magnon societies but not of the Neanderthals. Such
              a crisp division between the Ancients and Moderns, however, is a little blurred

              by the fact that some recent research calls into question the techniques used to
              age the Neanderthals (they have underestimated the age of old individuals in
              certain modern cemeteries). Also, we have evidence that some Neanderthals
              did care for the older, infirm individuals, such as the crippled       man from
              Shanidar (Shanidar 1; see below), who would have been unable to move far to
              find his own food.


              Language
              One of the most important features of modern humans is spoken language.
              From their sophisticated material culture, we usually assume the Cro-
              Magnons could also talk and communicate as modern people do. While we now
              know that apes can use symbols to build and arrange a large vocabulary, this is
              not the same thing as true language, which is a much richer, more complex and
                                                                                   PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




teeth




J7   Scientists have compared the vocal apparatus of modern adults (left) with that of the Neanderthals, to assess
the speaking ability of Neanderthals. Sounds are produced in the larynx, hut to form words the tongue must vary
the size and shape of the mouth and pharynx.   The Neanderthal pharynx is limited by the larynx, which sits higher
in the throat than in modern humans.   Furthermore, since the tongue is long and rests almost entirely in the mouth
rather than the throat, it can only alter the size of the mouth. This single-chamber acoustical system may have
restricted Neanderthals to a slow and limited form of speech.




more structured means of communication than any animal possesses. The
discussion about the growth of Neanderthal children                      is   important to the
question of whether they had a true language of modern type or not.
     Language acquisition        in    modern children proceeds while the child is
learning fundamental facts about its environment and the society in which it
has been born. While the brain grows and important internal connections
between different areas are established, language is learnt, so that by the age of
six or seven - as the brain reaches its adult size - the child has acquired most of

the linguistic skills it will need thereafter. As many of us know to our cost, it is
never as easy to learn a language after this time. But if Neanderthal children
grew up more quickly, they might have had less time to learn the fundamentals
of a language and a complex way of life before their brain organization was
largely finalized.     Or looked at from the opposite perspective, perhaps their
simpler way of life did not require such learning.
     The possibility that the Neanderthals had a simpler system of communica-
tion than succeeding peoples is suggested by the anatomy of the base of their
                                                                                                 23
skulls, which can be used to judge the type of vocal apparatus they possessed.

In modern humans, the skull of a newborn child has a flat base, and the voice
box or larynx is positioned high up in the throat, near to the skull base. This
means that babies (like most other mammals) can eat or suckle, and breathe at
the same time without choking. However, as the child grows, and particularly
as language use develops, the larynx gradually descends to its adult position,
enabling the individual to produce a very wide range of sounds. Now the child




                                                                                                                      89
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              can no longer eat and breathe simultaneously; the danger of choking is the price
              we pay for possessing a human vocal tract and a long tongue. The descent of the
              larynx can be tracked by an accompanying change from a flat to an angled skull
              base.    The interesting thing about the shape of the skull base in some adult
              Neanderthals is that it more closely resembles the infant condition in modern
              humans than that of adults, which suggests that some Neanderthals did not
              possess a vocal tract of modern type. In other words the apparatus for a modern
              range of sounds had yet to evolve.
                The vocal potential of the Neanderthals is perhaps demonstrated in a more
              positive light by the first fossil hyoid bone of a Neanderthal ever found, part of
              the Kebara skeleton. The hyoid bone lies in the throat and is intimately linked
              with the structure of the vocal tract. The Kebara hyoid bone is rather small
              considering the very robust individual of which it was part, and is virtually
              indistinguishable from a modern one. 24 But the conclusions that can be drawn
              from this about the level of Neanderthal vocal abilities are hotly disputed.
              Some experts believe, for instance, that the similarities between the Kebara and
              modern hyoids must indicate that the Neanderthals had similar vocal skills to
              modern humans. 25 Others point out that even pigs have similar hyoids to us,
              and that the hyoid can therefore tell us nothing about language abilities. 26
                When Ed Crelin and Philip Lieberman began their pioneering work of
              reconstructing the vocal tract of a Neanderthal           some 20 years ago, they
              suggested that the Neanderthals probably lacked proper language. 27         More
              recently, these conclusions have been modified to argue for a restricted vocal
              repertoire    in    Neanderthals rather than a      fundamental lack of spoken
              language. 28 What they lacked phonetically they may have partially made up for
              with a gesture-based system of communication. It certainly seems difficult to
              believe that Neanderthals lacked language          if   they showed such complex
              behaviour as the intentional disposal of their dead (although, as we discuss in
              Chapter 7,     it   is   debatable to what extent Neanderthal burials are indeed
              evidence of complex behaviour). Moreover, when considering the work done in
              reconstructing vocal tracts in early humans, it should be remembered that some
              pre-Neanderthal fossils show a cranial base of fundamentally modern type, and
              this includes fossils such as the Steinheim and Petralona skulls which, as we

              have seen (Chapter 3), may represent the ancestors of the Neanderthals. It
              seems very unlikely that the ability to produce a human type of language was
              present in the European precursors of the Neanderthals, with their smaller
              brains and less sophisticated behaviour, and yet was lost by their          more
              advanced descendants.
                So, given what we know about the Neanderthal brain and child develop-
              ment, about the likely shape of the vocal apparatus in Neanderthals, and their
              way of life, we can assume that the Neanderthals did have at least a rudimentary
              form of language, but that it was probably simple in construction and restricted
              in its   range of expression. However, as we mentioned earlier, the ability to
              create and understand language rather than mere sounds is a function of the
              brain rather than the vocal tract, and the quality of the Neanderthal brain




90
                                                                      PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



(despite much speculation) is still unknown to us.     We will examine in Chapter 6
what the archaeological evidence tells us about the sophistication of the
Neanderthal brain and the scale and complexity of their societies, information
which we shall then compare in Chapter 9 with that for the Moderns.


The shape of Neanderthal bodies
Comparative statistics
Living peoples in different parts of the world have different body shapes and
sizes.   Some of the heaviest peoples alive today come from Europe, North
America and northern Asia, while people of lighter build are more common in
tropical and sub-tropical areas. Some of these differences must therefore be
related to the climatic environments in which people live - although of course
one also has to take into account factors such as varying nutrition.
   For example, young adult male Europeans tend to weigh between about 65
and 75 kg (143 and 165 lb) and females between about 55 and 63 kg (121 and 139
lb),     whereas   most   males   from   Papua   New       Guinea   are   less   than
60 kg (132 lb) in weight, and females less than 50 kg (no lb) - at least 10 kg
(22 lb) lighter in each case. Similarly there is a great range in height and body
proportions. European males and females are mostly over 170 cm (5 ft 7 in) and
160 cm (5 ft 3 in) tall respectively. In comparison, their counterparts in New
Guinea are likely to be less than 160 and 150 cm (5 ft 3 in and 4 ft 1 1 in) tall, a
difference of at least 10 cm (4 in) in each case. 29
   Two rules were formulated in the last century by Bergmann and Allen to
explain the variation in the weight and shape of living organisms. 30 Bergmann's
rule postulates that body weight will tend to be larger in cold conditions, while
Allen's rule suggests that body extremities will be relatively shorter. Both can
be explained by the need of organisms in cold conditions to conserve heat. They
can accomplish this by minimizing their surface area relative to their volume
and weight. In this way they can more closely approximate the ideal shape of a
sphere, which has the minimum surface area for its volume. These rules seem
to operate in a general way in modern human populations when we compare
tropical African populations with those of northern Europe or Asia. Since the
Neanderthals lived in relatively cold climates, we would thus expect them to be
heavy and to have short extremities such as limbs. Let us put these rules to the
test,   then, and compare the Neanderthal physique to that of the Moderns.


Neanderthal vital statistics
The bodies of Neanderthals were strongly built by the standards of living
peoples, but they were not particularly tall. Various formulae have been worked
out to estimate height in modern individuals where only part of the skeleton is
known. These formulae can be applied to fossil remains as well. However, it can
be difficult to judge how applicable these formulae are to the Ancients. If we use
the formulae devised for modern people of European origin, then Neanderthal
males would have had a height of about 169 cm (5 ft 6^ in) and females 160 cm




                                                                                             9i
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL


                                                                                        Egyptian^
                                                                                                     ^ American Black

                                                                                                      Pygmy
                                                                                       Mnlanosion




                                                      Belgia




                                  Mean   Index   of    Tibia/Femur      Length    (Crural   Index)


              38 Here the limb proportions (measured as the crural index) of a range of recent populations of
              Homo sapiens have been plotted against the temperature of their environment              .   Various fossil
              populations have also been placed on the graph, according to their mean crural index. Note how
              low the crural index of the Neanderthals is compared with other fossil samples; they thus appear
              to display the classic cold-adapted limb proportions that one would expect from Allen s rule.
              (Recent migrant groups such as South African whites have been plotted against a temperature
              based on their 'ancestral place of origin - i.e. western Europe - rather than their present location,
              as they appear to approximate more closely their ancestral body proportions).




              (5 ft 3 in).   On the evidence often partial skeletons from Europe and eight from
              the Middle East, the latter were slightly taller, the largest by far being the man
              from Amud (Israel) who was about 179 cm (5 ft 10^ in) tall. The smallest of the
              Neanderthal females came from La Ferrassie (France) and Shanidar (Iraq),
              both about 155 cm (5 ft 1 in) tall. 31
                   Until the very complete skeleton was discovered at Kebara (Israel), we had
              little idea of what the entire middle part of a Neanderthal skeleton was like, but

              it   seems that Neanderthals had very large, barrel-shaped chests and a long
              back, with relatively short legs. This short and stocky physique is reminiscent
              of that of modern Inuit, albeit more extreme, and by analogy it seems that
              adaptation to cold is at least partly responsible for Neanderthal body shape.
                   Estimating Neanderthal body weight is more difficult. It is only possible to
              make educated          guesses,         using       formulae       for   certain       body or skeleton
              measurements which express the stature:weight relationship of modern people.
              When these are applied to Neanderthal bones, some results indicate a greater
              weight than any living peoples, but others suggest that the Neanderthals
              weighed much the same                   as       lean   {not   overweight) Europeans,               who       are
              themselves among the heaviest of living peoples i.e. about 65 kg (143 lb) for
              Neanderthal males and 50 kg (no lb) for the females.
                   It is evident the Neanderthals had shorter forearms and lower legs than the




92
                                                                    PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



modern average. In modern peoples the shin bone (tibia) varies from being
about 79 per cent of the length of the thigh bone (femur) among the Norwegian
Lapps to 86 per cent in black African groups. So the average Neanderthal value
of 79 per cent exactly matches the lowest modern value, and is even lower than
the Inuit value of 8i per cent. In their relatively heavy bodies the Neanderthals
seem to conform to Bergmann's rule, and in the shorter ends of their limbs to
              32
Allen's rule.    That the Neanderthal physique was partly determined by
climate is further supported by the slight differences in limb proportions
between the Neanderthals who lived in glaciated Europe and those who lived in
the less extreme climates of the Middle East.


Strength
The bones of the Neanderthal skeleton were strongly built by modern
standards (pis. 39, 42, 43). 33 The joints of the elbow, hip and knee were large,
                             .




and the walls of the leg bones were very thick. These features were also present
in earlier humans. In fact it is our own rather puny bones which seem to be the
exception. The skeletons of the earlier peoples were continually subjected to
stronger forces than our own. This can be partly explained by the powerful
muscles which moved the bones. Neanderthal muscles often left marks of deep
or wide attachment areas on bone surfaces, while the thicker leg bones were
probably to counter fatigue resulting from the constant stress under which they
were placed.
  Perhaps the robust anatomy of the Neanderthals is indicative of their life-
style, withmuch more effort - and consequent wear and tear on the skeleton -
required to obtain food than is the case among modern mobile foragers. Since,
as we have seen, the greater muscularity and robusticity of the Neanderthals

developed in children at an early age, it would seem that this feature was
primarily inherited rather than purely the result of environment or life-style; it
was part of their middle Pleistocene heritage.


Posture and movement
The way the Neanderthal skeleton operated was probably also distinctive, with
particular  movements and postures favoured. 34 There is evidence that
Neanderthals often squatted on their haunches, as some living peoples do, since
their shin bones show 'squatting facets'. Contrary to earlier ideas, their hands
could perform delicate operations (although there is evidence that they were
usually held in a more flexed position during manipulations) and their grip was
very powerful. The structure of the shoulder blade was also different from that
of most living people. The differences centre on the strength of the muscles
attached to the upper arm bone, the humerus. These muscles may have been
especially developed to keep the arm from twisting during strong movement.
We have already seen that the pelvis was distinctive in Neanderthals, and this
may be related to the different way in which the hip joint operated, putting
emphasis on the strength of the sides of the thigh bones rather than their front
and back, as in modern people. The leg, ankle and foot bones were also strongly




                                                                                           93
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              built to withstand hard use. None of these features, however, indicate that the
              Neanderthals had a bent-kneed and apelike posture compared with our own (cf.
              %• 5)-

              Disease and death among the Neanderthals

              Following the first Neanderthal discovery in 1856, some scientists believed that
              the bowed appearance of the limb bones was due to the disease of rickets (which
              we now know to be caused by a deficiency of vitamin D). These days this theory
              findsfew supporters, for although most Neanderthal limb bones do show
              bowing to a greater or lesser extent, such features are found in earlier robustly
              built hominids as well as Neanderthals. Moreover, any other skeletal evidence
              of rickets is lacking. The bowing seems instead to be related to strong
              muscularity.
                The Neander Valley skeleton displays unequivocal evidence, however, of
              another abnormality: the elbow joint was deformed, probably by a badly healed
              fracture. Indeed, evidence of injury or disease in some form or another is found
                                                                       35
              in almost all reasonably complete adult Neanderthals.         The Shanidar 1 man
              from Iraq and an isolated arm bone from Krapina in Croatia also show similar
              serious arm injuries. Erik Trinkaus' study of the large sample from Shanidar
              revealed a whole catalogue of injuries and degenerative disease in the heads,
              arms, ribs, legs and feet. 36 The Shanidar 1 man, for example, may have suffered
              head injuries and extensive crushing of the right side of his body - possibly in a
              cave rock fall - followed by infections and partial paralysis. He was probably
              blinded in his left eye, and would have been considerably disabled, yet he must
              have lived with these injuries for several years (pi. 44). This unfortunate
              individual thus supports the argument that the Neanderthals sometimes took
              care of their sick. The Shanidar 3 man had a partly healed rib wound which
              could have been accidentally or deliberately inflicted by the weapon of another
              Neanderthal. This is a rare case in which we can be fairly confident that the
              wound was ultimately the cause of death, although the victim must have
              lingered on, perhaps for several weeks. The Shanidar 5 man had an extensive
              scalp wound which healed well, as did an individual from the Croatian site of
              Krapina.
                The most famous of all diseased Neanderthals is the so-called 'Old Man' of
              La Chapelle-aux-Saints     (France), originally studied by Marcellin Boule
              (Chapter 1). This skeleton has been restudied on a number of occasions, with
              much revision of Boule's unflattering conclusions about the subhuman nature
              of the individual concerned. 37 The idea has become widespread that many of
              the peculiar features of the specimen described by Boule were the result of its
              diseased condition, of which he failed to take account. However, a recent study
              concluded that Boule's interpretations - although flawed by present standards
              - were reasonable for their time and that he was in fact aware of some of the
              pathologies. 38 He judged the 'Old Man' degenerate on criteria other than his
              arthritis. The full list of maladies suffered by this poor character is very




94
                                                                       PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



impressive. It includes degenerative joint disease in the skull, jaw, spinal
column, hip and        feet,   as well as a rib fracture   and extensive tooth   loss,

accompanied by abscesses. All this and not yet 40!
  The high incidence of degenerative joint disease in Neanderthals is perhaps
not surprising given what we know of the hard lives they led and the wear and
tear this would have produced on their bodies. But the prevalence of serious
injuries is more surprising, and indicates just how dangerous life was, even for
those who did manage to reach 'old age' in Neanderthal societies.



Neanderthal bodies and behaviour
Gathering together all the information presented in this chapter, we can create
a reasonable general portrait of the average Neanderthal man, woman or child.
Although we cannot reconstruct the colour of their skin or eyes, a reasonable
scientific argument can be proposed that in conditions of low sunlight they may

have had pale complexions. Neither is there any way to determine how hairy
they might have been. What we do know is that they were large headed, with
big noses, strong brows, low foreheads and           little   chin development. But
although they were short, squat and powerfully built, even as children, the
Neanderthals would have looked recognizably human as they carried out their
daily activities.
     The way they performed those activities, however, may have been less
efficient than that of their modern successors. Although we have no reason to

doubt that they had intelligence and memory, they may have depended more
on biological than cultural solutions to the varied problems of survival in their
world. The anatomy of both sexes shows they required more muscular effort
and activity to survive - brawn was probably still as important as brain to the
Neanderthals.       They must at least have had a simple language ability, and
although they probably aged quickly and died early by modern standards, there
was undoubtedly some supporting social structure to care for children who had
lost   parents and for disabled individuals. Arguably, such care was even
extended to a few individuals after their death (Chapter 7).
     At the end we are left with a fascinating, even paradoxical, portrait: one that
is   so human in some ways, yet so different from us in others.     We have come a
long way from Boule's Neanderthal (pi. 3) and Osborn's 'upward tendency'
(pi. 4). Just how different the Neanderthals were from modern humans will be

examined in Chapters 7 and 9. But in the meantime, the question that still
remains to be answered is whether it was the Neanderthal pattern of anatomy
and behaviour which gave rise to that of later peoples of fully modern type.
This is something we will discuss in Chapter 8, after we have looked in the next
two chapters at the different peoples alive in the rest of the inhabited world at
the time of the Neanderthals.




                                                                                              95
                                           CHAPTER 5

                         Humans at the Crossroads:
                             The Middle East Corridor



     The Middle East has clearly been of great importance during the last 10,000
     years   in   the   early   development of agriculture, pastoralism and other
     cornerstones of later Western civilization such as writing.       1
                                                                           But it has been of
     similar importance in the story of human evolution for the last million years,
     being the crossroads between three continents and faunal provinces. As Homo
     erectus spread out of Africa over        1   million years ago, the Middle East would
     have been on the migration routes to Asia and Europe. Within the small area of
     the eastern Mediterranean known as the Levant, closest to Africa, a variety of
     environments have always survived the regular climatic assaults of the
     Pleistocene glacial-interglacial cycles; this area provided a refuge as the climate
     grew colder in the north or more arid in the south. So it was, 100,000 years ago,
     as a new phase of human evolution began.
       The story of human evolution in the Middle East is very murky until about
     150,000 years ago, when a rather primitive hominid population, neither
     modern nor Neanderthal, seems to have occupied the Levant. The only
     informative human fossil from this time is an enigmatic front of a skull with
     part of the face preserved below. 2 This specimen was found in 1927 by Flinders
     Turville-Petre, an army officer, in the cave of Zuttiyeh in the Wadi Amud
     (Valley of the Pillar, named after an unusual column of rock) near Lake Galilee.
     Despite its fragmentary nature, the specimen has been much discussed, for
     attempts have been made to link it to the evolution of either modern humans or
     Neanderthals.      It   has a strong brow ridge and a narrow frontal bone, both
     primitive characters, but a rather           domed front, which gives a somewhat
     modern appearance          to   the   profile of the forehead. The upper face is
     transversely very flat, and the fragmentary cheek bone is angled as in modern
     humans. So in this last respect, the fossil is quite different from Neanderthals
     with their swept back cheek bones. Arguments have centred on whether this
     therefore makes the Zuttiyeh fossil modern. Unfortunately the angled
     morphology of the cheek bone is an ancestral characteristic which modern
     humans have retained, and it is therefore impossible to say whether the
     Zuttiyeh fossil is fundamentally modern or - as seems more likely - primitive.
     Most probably it lies close to the evolutionary divergence of the Neanderthal
     and modern groups, which is why its affinities are so difficult to ascertain.
        In this chapter we will first describe the fossil evidence from the key sites in
     the Middle East, evidence which we will then use to help us unravel the
     complex history of human evolution in the area.




96
                                         HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS! THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR



Tabun and Skhul
A much larger group of fossils which has also been difficult to place in the
evolutionary sequence is that from the two Mount Carmel caves of Skhul (es-
                                                            3
Skhul, 'cave of the kids') and Tabun (et-Tabun, 'the oven'). Excavations by an
Anglo-American team in the 1930s led to the uncovering of the remains of at
least ten men, women and children from the small cave remnant of Skhul, and a

smaller sample from the much larger cave of Tabun, including the partial
skeleton of a woman. The caves faced down a valley called the Wadi el-
Mughara (Valley of the Caves), which ran towards the Mediterranean coast.
This valley would have held water in a river for part of the year, and occupants
of the caves would also have had the choice of obtaining food resources from
Mount Carmel itself, rising up to nearly 500 m (1,640 ft), or travelling through
the valley to the wide coastal plain, over which they would have had an excellent
view (pi. 55).
  The Skhul material included several apparent burials, the most complete
being of adult males. The skeleton of Skhul 4 was lying on its right side with
folded arms and tightly flexed legs (pi. 54), while Skhul 5 lay on his back with
his head    bent down on to his chest and his legs also tightly flexed (pi. 53).
Within his arms was the jaw bone of a large wild boar.
  The Tabun material was less extensive and covered a much greater
stratigraphic depth than the Skhul hominids, which were all found in a single
layer about 1    m thick. The Tabun finds of a partially extended female skeleton
and an isolated larger (male?) mandible were recovered from layer C. Both the
Skhul and Tabun         fossil   hominids were associated with similar Middle
Palaeolithic (Levalloiso-Mousterian) artifacts, which led scholars to conclude
that the caves of Skhul and Tabun were inhabited at about the same time.
  Thus when Ted McCown and Arthur Keith published their detailed two-
volume report on the   sites, they assumed that the fossil humans were

approximate contemporaries and members of one population. 4 That popula-
tion   was clearly very variable, since the Skhul people were predominantly
modern-looking, while the Tabun woman was rather lightly built but was
otherwise very Neanderthal-like.          McCown and Keith concluded that the
Mount Carmel people were part of a human evolutionary radiation which was
clinal (gradually    changing) in nature. In Europe the radiation was towards
'classic'   Neanderthal forms, in the east towards early modern humans
(ancestors of the Cro-Magnons), while in the Levant an intermediate type had
developed     which could        be   called   'progressive'   Neanderthal - not an
evolutionary intermediate between Neanderthals and moderns, but a less
specialized Neanderthal and therefore somewhat closer to the Cro-Magnons.
Other interpretations followed, including the possibility that the Tabun-Skhul
samples were the actual missing evolutionary link between Neanderthals and
modern humans,        or alternatively that they represented hybrids between
separate contemporaneous Neanderthal and modern human populations. Yet
another variation was the suggestion that, if the material was early in date, it




                                                                                         97
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


              might represent the          common ancestral stock for both Neanderthals and
              modern humans. Our views of the Mount Carmel fossils have developed as the
              fossil record has grown, but in the last few years all of these suppositions have

              been replaced by new hypotheses, as we shall see at the end of the chapter.


              Qafzeh and Shanidar
              The Qafzeh cave lies on the east side of a valley which runs south from the
              famous biblical town of Nazareth. 5 The cave looks rather ordinary when
              viewed from the valley, but it has proved to be one of the most important of all
              fossil   hominid sites (pi. 59). The first series of excavations (1933-35) were
              directed by Rene Neuville, the French consul in Jerusalem. Although he found
              seven    fossil    hominids (two in Upper Palaeolithic levels, the others in the
              Middle     Palaeolithic), the intervention of the       Second World War and           its

              aftermath in Palestine prevented the work from being published in detail
              before Neuville's death in 1952. Work was resumed there between 1965 and
              1979 under the direction of Bernard Vandermeersch, and this produced
              remains of at least another 14 individuals from the Middle Palaeolithic. As at
              Skhul, a number of men, women and children seemed to have been deliberately
              buried, and in the case of the child            known as Qafzeh 11, the burial was
              accompanied by the skull and antlers of a large deer, presumably buried as a
              complete head. There was also a probable double burial of a young adult
              (Qafzeh 9) with a six-year-old child buried across its feet.
                It was recognized early on that the Qafzeh hominids resembled those from

              Mount Carmel, in that some of the material showed a modern morphology, and
              yet was found with a Middle Palaeolithic industry. However, the inadequate
              dating of all these sites prevented real understanding of their relationships and,
              although the Qafzeh and Skhul samples were called 'proto-Cro-Magnoids' in
              the   1950s,      it   was not   until the   Qafzeh finds were studied   in   detail   by
              Vandermeersch and his colleagues that their real importance began to emerge,
              as we shall discuss below.
                It is    an Iraqi cave, Shanidar, that has produced the largest sample of
              Neanderthals from the Middle East (Chapter 4). 6 Nine Neanderthals - ranging
              in age from very young infants to relatively 'old' men, and in completeness from

              a few vertebrae to fairly complete skeletons - were excavated by a team led by
              Ralph Solecki between 1953 and i960. These remains have been studied by
              various workers, but the most exhaustive and informative study was that of
              Erik Trinkaus, published in 1983. Some of these Neanderthals, at least, seem to
              have been deliberately buried, and it has even been suggested that the Shanidar
              4 man was buried with flowers, although this has recently been seriously
              questioned (Chapter 7).


              Amud and Kebara
              No doubt inspired by the success of Solecki's team at Shanidar, a Japanese
              team under H. Suzuki began work in 1959 at Amud Cave in Israel, which lay in




98
                                     HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR




                         A Cold Body in a Warm Cave:
                            Neanderthal Proportions


       The Kebara skeleton is so well-preserved that it has provided the
       best data yet available on Neanderthal anatomy. As we saw in
                                                         7


       Chapter 4, the discovery of this skeleton led scholars to reassess
       both the function of the Neanderthal pelvis and (following examin-
       ation of the hyoid bone) preconceptions about Neanderthal vocal
       abilities.
          Using the proportions of the upper limbs and trunk it has also
       been possible to look at the shape of the whole body, relating the
       width of the pelvis to the estimated height of the Kebara individual. 8
       We have seen that in modern populations body shape can be
       related to climatic adaptation. In hot climates it is advantageous to
       maximize the surface area of the skin for heat loss, and this is
       achieved with a long thin body approximating the shape of a tall,
       narrow cylinder i.e. a tall stature with slim hips. (The skeleton of the
       Homo erectus boy from Nariokotome in Kenya has exactly this body
       shape, similar to modern east Africans.) In cold climates, however,
       stature is low relative to hip breadth (e.g. among the Lapps and
       Inuit); this creates a shorter, wider body approximating a sphere, to
       minimize surface area. How does the Kebara skeleton compare to
       these two body forms?
          Well, the Kebara man most resembles cold-adapted populations
       in the height/hip breadth relationship; in fact his body proportions
       are even more pronounced than those of any modern examples. We
       conclude that even in the relatively warm climate of the Middle
       East, the Neanderthals were fundamentally cold-adapted people;
       this is in marked contrast to the early modern humans, both in this
       area (e.g. Skhul and Qafzeh) and in Europe (the Cro-Magnons).




the same valley (Wadi Amud) as Zuttiyeh Cave. They were rewarded two years
later by the discovery of a fairly complete but shattered Neanderthal skeleton,

at the very top of the Middle Palaeolithic level - so high in the stratigraphy that

itwas mixed not only with Upper Palaeolithic artifacts, but even with pottery
from the levels further above. 9 Three more fragmentary specimens were found
in subsequent years. But nobody could take seriously the published absolute

dates from the Amud Neanderthals, since one method suggested a date of only
28,000 years ago and a second method less than 20,000 years. Recent work at
Amud by an Israeli team has produced further Neanderthal fossils and a re-
evaluation of the dating is underway (see below).
  Another Mount Carmel cave, Kebara, has recently been the focus of
renewed international collaboration. It had previously produced a number of
Upper Palaeolithic fossils in 1931, and a Neanderthal child in 1964. But the
most spectacular find, made in 1984, was of a skeleton in an evident grave
(see box above). 10




                                                                                      99
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


                      The skeleton was virtually intact from the lower jaw to the pelvis, but the
                   skulland upper jaw were missing except for one tooth; the skull was
                   presumably present originally, but had been removed by subsequent human or
                   animal activity.



                   Comparing the fossils
                   Understanding the complexities of the Middle East is no easier for the Middle
                   Palaeolithic than it is for the present day.       We will look at the physical variation
                   in the fossils in this section, and then go on to discuss the dating evidence; the
                   archaeological evidence will be surveyed in Chapter 7. Broadly speaking, the
                   fossils, with one or two exceptions, can be divided into Neanderthal-like ones,

                   and those similar to modern humans. The former include the remains from
                   Tabun, Shanidar, Amud and Kebara, whereas the more modern-looking
                   specimens are from Skhul and Qafzeh.


                   Middle East Neanderthals
                   The characteristics used to classify the Neanderthal specimens have already
                   been detailed in Chapter 4. The Tabun, Shanidar and Amud specimens
                   generally have a long, broad and low skull, a large double-arched brow ridge, a
                   big face with a particularly large nose and midfacial prognathism, and a large
                                                                                         11
                   palate and lower jaw with little or no chin development.                   This is certainly so
                   for the Kebara lower jaw, which is one of the most massive human jaws known.
                   Amud has the largest brain capacity of any fossil hominid, over 1,700 ml, while
                   Tabun is one of the smallest Neanderthals in this respect, with a volume of only


long, broad and                                          high and rounded
low braincase                                            braincase
                                                                                                        developed
                                                                                                         forehead
                                  Large, double-arched
                                        brow ridge

                                                                                                       small brow
                                                                                                             ridge


                                                                                                         low orbits

                                          midfacial
                                          prognathism
no canine fossa                                          hollowed cheeks
                                                         (canine fossa)
                                                         no retromolar gap
retromolar gap
                                                                      large teeth
                                       minimal chin
                                                          some chin development
             Shanidar 1                                                       Qafzeh 9

                   jg A comparison of the Shanidar 1 Neanderthal and Qafzeh g early modern skulls. Both were
                   found associated with Middle Palaeolithic artifacts, but the modern Qafzeh hominid is probably
                   more ancient than the Shanidar Neanderthal. Note the comparatively large nose and low
                   forehead of the Neanderthal.




100
                                            HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR




40    A comparison of the Mount Carmel finds; from the original publication by McCown and
Keith: (left) the Tabun Neanderthal and (right) the Skhul 4 early Modern.




about 1,250 ml. Brow ridge thickness is variable, being massive in the small
Tabun female and surprisingly slender in the big male from Amud (pi. 50).
Chin development varies too: it is minimal in Kebara, the Tabun 1 woman, and
the Shanidar jaws, but more marked in Amud and Tabun 2 - even leading to
suggestions that the latter fossil might be a primitive modern rather than a
Neanderthal. In the rest of the skeleton, these Neanderthals have the stocky,
cold-adapted body proportions of their European counterparts, but are on
average a little taller, with Amud being by far the tallest Neanderthal known, at
about 1.78       m (5   ft   10   in).   Their pelvic structure     is   like   that of other
Neanderthals - in fact the distinctive Neanderthal extended pubic ramus shape
was first recognized in the Tabun woman, and the Kebara male has the longest
pubic ramus ever found.


The 'Moderns'
The Skhul and Qafzeh samples do look decidedly 'modern' when compared
with specimens from sites such as Tabun and Kebara. 12 The braincases are
high and rather short, rounded in profile but, unlike Neanderthals, parallel-
sided rather than spherical in posterior view (pis. 56—58). The brow ridges are
moderate or small in skulls like Skhul 4 or Qafzeh 9, but even where the brow
ridge is strongly built (as in Qafzeh 6 or Skhul 5), it is different in shape from
that of Neanderthals. The face has a broad but low nasal opening, and mid-
facial projection is not developed.         The cheek bones are hollowed rather than
flat or inflated,   unlike the Neanderthals, and they do not retreat at the sides.
The orbits are wide, but low, and the whole upper face is broad. The lower face
is   more projecting, particularly in Qafzeh 9, where the teeth are very large, and




                                                                                                101
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


              the total prognathism of the face is strong - a distinctly primitive feature.
              Forehead development is well marked in most of the skulls, but less so in Skhul
              9.   The lower jaws are relatively shorter than those of Neanderthals without the
              forward positioning of the teeth; tooth size is in some respects more primitive
              than that of Neanderthals, however, with large third molars in such fossils as
              Qafzeh 9.
                 The skeletons of the Skhul and Qafzeh samples are even more modern than
              their skulls. And in contrast to the Neanderthals, their body proportions are
              tropical rather than cold-adapted, with long forearms and tibiae and an average
              stature of about 1 .83   m (6 ft) in males and .70 m (5
                                                                 1           ft 7 in) in females.    However,
              as    with Neanderthals, they were probably well-muscled, making them
              somewhat heavier for their height than living humans. This may explain why
              they, like Neanderthals, were larger-brained than us, their brain capacity
              averaging about 1550 ml. But distinct from Neanderthals, they had pelvic
              morphologies of modern type, suggesting that their hip                    joints functioned

              exactly like ours.Compared with the relatively short-legged Neanderthals,
              these early Moderns should have found long-distance walking a lot easier. And
              the fact that (so far at least) the skeletons reveal fewer signs of fractures and
              stress    suggests    that   their   life-style   was   less   wearing than that of the
              Neanderthals.



              New dates for old fossils
              So what was the relationship between these Neanderthal and modern groups in
              the Middle East? As we have seen, an early view was that they represented a
              single,    highly variable population, containing Neanderthal-like and near
              modern forms, which might lie close to the divergence of the Neanderthal and
              modern evolutionary lines. Alternatively, some scholars felt that they were
              perhaps the results of hybridization between contemporaneous Neanderthal
              and modern groups, or the actual evolutionary link between Neanderthal
              ancestors and modern descendants.
                   However,   all           depended on the fact that the sub-groups
                                    these views
              resembling Neanderthals and moderns were contemporaneous, and evidence
              began to emerge that this was not so. First there was evidence from animal
              fossils that the Mount Carmel site of Tabun might be somewhat older than

              neighbouring Skhul. This was supported by an analysis of stone tools from
              both sites, which suggested that the local stone knappers produced progres-
              sively narrower and narrower flakes at Tabun and, if this was so, the Skhul
                                                                                                13
              flakes logically followed on at the very end of the Tabun sequence.                    Thus the
              Tabun people might represent the ancestors for Skhul's inhabitants; so the
              latter    would have continued to develop their stone tool-making skills in a
              regular way as they lived on Mount Carmel. According to this theory, the
              Neanderthals of Tabun would have dated from 50,000-60,000 years ago while
              their more modern descendants lived in Skhul (and Qafzeh?) about 40,000-

              45,000 years ago. But there were some problems with this reconstruction of




102
                                           HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


               1985 VIEW                         1987 VIEW                           1990 VIEW
      40,000     SkhOI                              SkhOI

                Qafzeh

O                Amud                              Amud                                Amud
<               TabQn                              TabQn
j£    60,000    Kebara                             Kebara                             Kebara
<
UJ
>

                                                                                       SkhQI
                                                  Qafzeh                              Qafzeh
     120,000                                                                          TabQn



41 New dating techniques have recently upset the traditional understanding of the early modern
(dark grey) and Neanderthal (white) remains from the Middle East. Until relatively recently,
scientists had believed that Moderns succeeded Neanderthals in the area,   and thus may have
evolved from them (left). But the early results of thermoluminescence, electron-spin resonance and
uranium-series dating placed Moderns both before and after the Neanderthals (centre). The
current interpretation of the evidence, however, suggests that at times the two groups may have
been approximate contemporaries (right).




events too. For one thing, not everyone was convinced that there was such a
neat evolutionary sequence from the Neanderthals to the early Moderns in the
Middle East. Additionally, while some analyses of the large mammals found at
the sites supported the view that Tabun preceded Skhul, studies of the small
mammals suggested that level C at Tabun (which contained the Neanderthal
woman's skeleton) was actually younger than the main hominid levels of early
Moderns at Qafzeh.
   It was impossible to test these views as long as the only applicable dating

method was radiocarbon, which ceases to produce accurate results on materials
over 40,000 years old - the critical time period in the Middle East. But things
started to improve in 1987 when the technique of thermoluminescence (TL:
see box pp. 58-59) was applied to burnt flints from the levels adjoining the
Neanderthal burial at Kebara. The result - a date of about 60,000 years - was
much as expected, and it was confirmed by electron spin resonance (ESR)
dating of animal teeth from equivalent levels. 14 However, a real shock followed
when the TL technique was applied to the early modern burial levels at Qafzeh.
The date produced was about 92,000 years, implying that the Qafzeh early
Moderns were not only about three times as old as the Cro-Magnons of Europe,
but some 30,000 years older than the Neanderthal burial at Kebara! 15 The
evidence from the small mammals thus seemed to be endorsed, and this age
estimate was further confirmed (even exceeded) by the ESR dating of
associated mammal teeth from Qafzeh at 120,000-100,000 years old. 16
   The next logical step was to test the similar-looking hominids from Skhul,
and these too proved to be ancient: dated by ESR on mammal teeth at 100,000-




                                                                                                     103
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR




                                        Evolution at the Crossroads



                    The hominid remains found at Tabun and Skhul in the Middle East
                    were originally thought to be members of a single population,
                    representing the gradual evolutionary transition of Neanderthals to
                    early Moderns. But as more and more evidence accumulated that
                    the modern-looking samples from Skhul and Qafzeh were actually
                    older than the Neanderthals of Amud and Kebara, this view became
                    untenable. So how can we explain the complex pattern of evolution
                    in the region? Three possible answers are presented below.

                       In one view, the Middle East is simply a zone of overlap between
                    two evolving human lineages. One, basically European, is that of
                    the Neanderthals; the other, African, is that of modern humans. At
                    any one time during the period 120,000-40,000 years ago - prior to
                    Neanderthal extinction in the area-either or both lineages could be
                    represented there; but it is not currently possible to establish
                    contemporaneity (for example the Tabun Neanderthal could be
                    older than, contemporaneous with, or younger than the Skhul/
                    Qafzeh specimens). 17 The fact that some of the associated animals
                    at Skhul and Qafzeh could be found in Africa and Arabia might
                    support an influx of fauna, including humans, from the hotter, more
                    arid south.
                      The second also views the Middle East as an area of overlap
                    between two human lineages. According to this theory, however, it
                    was the modern humans who first settled the region (at least
                    100,000 years ago), with the Neanderthals arriving only about
                    70,000 years ago - perhaps in response to the degenerating climate
                                                                                18
                    in Europe associated with the onset of the last glaciation.    The ESR
                    dates for the Tabun Neanderthal are accounted for by arguing that
                    this individual was actually from layer B at the site. Thus the
                    hominid sequence would be: Zuttiyeh (archaic) with a local late
                    Acheulean over 150,000 years ago; the Skhul and Qafzeh early
                    Moderns with a 'Tabun      C   Middle Palaeolithic industry, about
                    100,000 years ago; and lastly the Tabun, Kebara and Amud
                    Neanderthals associated with a 'TabDn B' Middle Palaeolithic
                    industry between 70,000 and 40,000 years ago. It is further argued
                    that the Neanderthals - with their superior adaptation to colder
                    conditions - might have displaced the early Moderns. Both these
                    explanations, therefore, assume that the Middle Eastern corridor
                    was open in both southern and northern directions.
                       The third option - based on the fact that the early Moderns of the
                    Middle East still show primitive or Neanderthal-like characteristics
                    while the Neanderthals of the region are not as 'classic' as
                    European examples - returns to the original concept of a single,
                    variable population. 19 Thus, this population was a regional variant
                    of Homo sapiens, with its own mixture of primitive, modern and
                    Neanderthal features. The Qafzeh and Kebara people are merely
                    extremes of a continuous range of variation, and only a part of that
                    range (the 'modern' elements) were selected for, leading to the
                    appearance of true anatomically modern humans in the area after
                    40,000 years ago.




104
19 The East Turkana (formerly East Rudolf) area of northern Kenya has produced a wealth
of fossil hominids dating from between one and two million years ago, representing (from
left)   Homo habilis, early Homo erectus, and robust australopithecines (Paratithropus).
20 (Above left) Over 60 hominid fossils have been found at the Arago (or Tautavel) cave in France. About
400,000 years old, these fragments - the front of a skull, a left hip bone and two lower jaws - display
features reminiscent of both earlier Homo erectus populations and later Neanderthals.

21,22 Rear views of the skulls from Biache-St-Yaast in France (top right) and Swanscombe in England
(cast, above right).   Perhaps representing early members of the Neanderthal lineage, these skulls have the
same central depression in the occipital bone (suprainiac fossa) as their Neanderthal successors.




23,24 The skull from Steinheim in Germany displays a very prominent brow ridge, but it is small and
gracile in comparison with other Neanderthals. Some scholars have attributed the modern-looking
hollowed cheek region to distortion suffered during fossilization.
                                                                  2$ {Left) This skull from Saccopastore in Italj
                                                                  dated to about 120,000 years ago - exhibits many
                                                                  Neanderthal features in the brainease and face, but
                                                                  has a relatively small brain capacity.

                                                                  26 (Below left) A reconstruction of the most
                                                                  complete Ehringsdorf hominid skull showing a
                                                                  combination of advanced features (high skull and
                                                                  forehead, large brain) and primitive ones (strong
                                                                  brow ridge, angled occipital). Like Swanscombe,
                                                                  the occipital bone foreshadows that of the
                                                                  Neanderthals.

                                                                  27 (Below right) The skull from Petralona, Greece,
                                                                  may be over 300,000 years old. In many ways the
                                                                  face resembles that of the Neanderthals, with its
                                                                  double-arched brow ridges and inflated cheeks, but
                                                                  the back of the skull is more like that of Homo
                                                                 erect us (see x-ray).




The origins of the Neanderthals




     28,29 Side view of the Petralona skull and x-ray, show ing its strong brow ridge and occipital torus.
30,31 (Above and right) Neanderthal skulls from the French sites of La
Chapelle-aux-Saints (left and above) and La Ferrassie (right and below).
Although discovered in the early years of this century, they remain the most
complete European Neanderthal fossils yet known. The skulls reveal many
typical Neanderthal features: strong, double-arched brows, a bulging
occipital bone at the rear, inflated cheek bones, large teeth, midfacial
projection and little chin development.




32 Casts of two partial female Neanderthal skulls from Krapina in Croatia
(left) and Gibraltar.


33 (Right) Partial Neanderthal skull from the French site of La
Quina.

34 (Below) This rear view of the Neanderthal skulls from (left to right) La
Chapelle-aux-Saints, La Quina and La Ferrassie clearly shows their
distinctive spherical profiles and suprainiac fossae (depressions in the centre
of the occipital bone).




                                          B1^ ^^B^
                                          V*                    ^^^^^B^^*'^^
                                                                                        ^^^^^^^^^^^^B
                                                                                        ^^^P^^^>Sv^i
                                          w^F                                                      ^        ^H
                                                                    ^^g                 WF%
                                         I                           w                  1           i        H
                                         WBB&^L^b-                ^&v
                                                                   p^v-^,^.
                                                                                  "
                                                                                      & BgK <--^
                                                                                            -            ^%4 ijd^H

                                                                                        HSifcsll^'-^s^
                                                                                                         ^JJm
The Neanderthals in Europe


35,36 (Above, left and right) The Guattari (Monte
Circeo) Neanderthal skull was found in 1939,
reportedly in a circle of stones. Recent research
suggests that it may have been brought to the
cave by hyenas.

37,38 (Left) Cast of the reconstructed skull from
Saint-Cesaire in France. Representing one of the
last Neanderthals,the remains were found with
Chatelperronian artifacts, and dated at about
36,000 years ago. (Below) Cast of part of the
Saint-Cesaire skeleton as it was excavated from
the rockshelter.
39 {Left) Humeri (upper arm bones) of the
French Neanderthals from La Ferrassie (male
and female), La Chapelle-aux-Saints and La
Quina. The shafts may not be very thick, but
they are strong. The bowing is probably related
to the power of the muscles, and the large ends of
the bones reflect their large joint surfaces.

40 {Above) Casts of the Neanderthal lower jaws
from Amud in Israel (top) and Saint-Cesaire,
France. Both have the characteristic space behind
the third molar, but also show slight development
of a chin, a more modern feature.
                                                  42 Hand bones of the Shanidar 4
                                                  Neanderthal, displaying the typical strong,
                                                  broad finger bones, the particularly wide
                                                  ends probably related to a powerful grip.

                                                  43 (Below) The beautifully preserved right
                                                  foot of the woman from La Ferrassie.
                                                  Neanderthal leg and feet bones were
                                                  robust to withstand hard use.




Neanderthal anatomy




41 (Opposite) Comparing the pelvis of an early-
Modern from Cro-Magnon (left) and that of a
Neanderthal from La Ferrassie. The huge
opening at the front of the pelvis (obturator
foramen) and long pubic ramus of the
Neanderthal are clearlv visible.
Neanderthals in the Middle East

44-47 (Above left) The Shanidar 1 man clearly suffered
substantial injury, and was probably blind in his left eye.
(Above right and right) The Shanidar 5 skull has an
especially large nose and pronounced midfacial
prognathism. (Below) Skulls of Shanidar 1 (cast, left),
Zuttiyeh (cast, centre) and Tabun. Zuttiyeh could be a pre-
Neanderthal and Tabun (about 110,000 years old?) an early
Neanderthal.
                                                       1




48,49 (Righ?) The Israeli
anthropologist Yoel Rak (facing
camera) at work on the site of Amud
in Israel. (Below) A fairly complete
Neanderthal skeleton was found in
1984 at the Mount Carmel cave of
Kebara in Israel. It belonged to a
large male individual, and dates from
about 60,000 years ago. It is
particularly famous for its pelvis -
which has the longest pubic ramus
ever discovered - and its massive
                                               1
                                               ;   1
lower jaw.




                                                           50 (Above) The Amud skeleton is the tallest
                                                           Neanderthal yet known. It is thought to be a relatively
                                                           late specimen, and is dated by electron spin resonance
                                                           to about 50,000 years ago. Its skull has an enormous
                                                           brain capacity (over 1,700 ml) and displays many
                                                           features characteristic of the Neanderthals.

                                                           51 (Below) The site of   Amud is on the left of this pillai
                                                           (Amud) of rock, after which it has been named.




                                        <**
                                  I.*

                                          i
                                              vi




                    >*'*.
                                    52,53 {Left) The reconstructed skull and skeletal remains
                                    of Skhul 5, an early modern adult male. (Below)
                                    Reconstruction of the Skhul 5 burial. The man was
                                    apparently interred with the jaw bone of a wild boar in
                                    his arms.




Early Moderns in the
Middle East




54 The reconstructed burial of an
early Modern, Skhul 4, a strongly
built male.


55 (Below) The small cave of es-
Skhul on Mount Carmel, Israel,
yielded the remains of ten early
modern individuals.
56 Skull casts of the early modern Skhul 5 and Qafzeh 9. The shape of their braincase is distinctly
modern, but this is combined with a rather large and more primitive projecting face.




57 (Above) The Qafzeh    1 1   skull
is   remarkably modern in
appearance. Belonging to a child
of about 12 years old, it is one of
the most ancient in the Qafzeh
sequence.

58 [Above right) The braincase of
Qafzeh 6 looks rather modern,
but the skull has strong brows
and a wide, flat face.

59 The Qafzeh cave, near
Nazareth, has produced the
largest sample of early modern
humans from anywhere in the
world. They are dated by thermo-
luminescence and electron
spin resonance to between
80,000 and 120,000 years ago.
                                                              The transition to modern
                                                              humans in Africa



                                                              60 {Left) Fossil skull excavated from the site of
                                                              Broken Hill in Kabwe (Zambia). Known also as
                                                              Rhodesian Man, the Broken Hill remains show
                                                              features of both Homo erectus and Homo sapiens and
                                                              are often consequently classified as 'archaic Homo
                                                              sapiens'.




61 (Right) The Bodo skull from Ethiopia may be
about 400,000 years old, and combines a massive
face and a thick skull with a large face. It could be
an early member of the Afro-European populations
represented by the Broken Hill and Petralona fossils.


62 The Sale skull from Morocco is also about
400,000 years old. It is much smaller than specimens
such as Bodo, and probably represents a female. The
back of the braincase looks quite modern, but
displays abnormal neck muscle attachments,
probably caused by disease.


63 (Below) Casts of the two crania from Omo Kibish,
Ethiopia. Both may date from the beginning of the
late Pleistocene.   Omo 2 (left) shows a number of
archaic features in the braincase - including a broad
angular occipital bone - but has a relatively small
brow ridge, whereas Omo      1   is   modern in its cranial
vault but has a broad and quite flat frontal bone.
64,65 {Above left) The Ngaloba 18 skull from Laetoli in Tanzania may date from about 130,000
years ago, and belonged to a borderline Modern. (Above right) Border Cave 1 is a fragmentary skull
and some possibly associated limb bones. Most experts accept it as an anatomically modern
specimen, although many dispute the claims for an antiquity of about 80,000-100,000 years.




                                                                    66,67 {Left and below right) The Jebel Irhoud
                                                                    1 cranium from Morocco is a late archaic


                                                                    specimen, probably dating from between
                                                                    200,000 and 100,000 years ago. It combines a
                                                                    rather primitive cranial vault with a large but
                                                                    more modern-looking face.




                                                                       68 {Left) The Jebel Irhoud 2 skull.
                                                                       Consisting originally of only two parts,
                                                                       the differences between the modern
                                                                       front and primitive rear are so
                                                                       pronounced that the two pieces were
                                                                       once thought to have come from two
                                                                       different individuals, one an Ancient
                                                                       and the other a Modern.
The Moderns arrive in Europe

                               69-71 {Top) The 'Old Man' of Cro-
                               Magnon is associated with late
                               Aurignacian artifacts, and dates from
                               about 30,000 years ago. Note the high
                               forehead, small brows and hollowed cheek
                               bones of this early Modern. (Centre)
                               Probable male and female skulls from
                               Pfedmosti in Czechoslovakia, dating from
                               about 26,000 years ago. (Bottom) The cave
                               site of Mladec in Czechoslovakia yielded

                               the remains of several early Moderns
                               associated with the Aurignacian, including
                               this skull which probably belonged to a
                               female. Although the bulging occipital
                               resembles some Neanderthal specimens,
                               the facial features are distinctly modern.



                               FACING PAGE

                               72-74 ( Top) Three probably female early
                               modern skulls from Europe: Cro-Magnon
                               2 (left), Abri Pataud (centre) and
                               Pfedmosti 4 (cast, right). (Middle) These
                               three skulls were found in the Cro-
                               Magnon rockshelter in France in 1868.
                               They probably came from two males (1,
                               left and 3, right) and a female (2, centre).

                               (Bottom) This view contrasts the facial
                               form of two French Neanderthals (La
                               Chapelle-au\-Saints on the left and La
                               Ferrassie, right) with that of the Cro-
                               Magnon   1   skull (centre).   Notice the
                               differences in forehead shape and brow
                               ridge size, and the size and shape of the
                               orbits, cheeks and nasal openings.
The transition to Moderns in the Far East
                         and Australasia
                                                                       \jt__



                                            75 {Tup left) Probable male (left) and female
                                            skulls from the Upper Cave at Zhoukouciian,
                                            China. Dated from associated fauna to about
                                            25,000 years ago, these fossils are reminiscent
                                            of the European Cro-Magnons and are
                                            perhaps the oldest known early modern skulls
                                            from the region.
                                            76 (Above) The Dali skull from China dates
                                            from the late middle Pleistocene. It combines
                                            large brow ridges and a thick, low braincase
                                            with a large but rather modern-looking face.

                                            77 Cast of skulls from Kow Swamp in
                                            Australia (left) and Sangiran in Java (right).
                                            Followers of the multiregional camp believe
                                            the Homo erectus populations from Sangiran
                                            could have been ancestral to the inhabitants of
                                            Kow Swamp, living some 700,000 years later.
                                            78 Two early modern skulls from Liujiang in
                                            China (left) and Keilor, Australia (right).
                                            Compare the gracile skull from Keilor with
                                            the much sturdier Kow Swamp specimen
                                            (plate 77).
                                            HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


80,000 years,
              20
                 and older          still   by the   TL dating of burnt flints.       21
                                                                                           The
Neanderthal sites of Tabun and Amud have recently been dated by ESR:
Amud to 50,000-40,000 years, and Tabun ranging from 200,000 to 90,000
             22
years old.        The Tabun dates are some of the most challenging to conventional
views, in that they date the whole stratigraphic sequence to about double the
traditional age estimates (fig. 41). This means that the Tabun woman found in
level   C is probably about     1   10,000 years old i.e. she was an early Neanderthal
apparently living at around the same time as, or slightly before, the early
modern Qafzeh people.
  If the ESR chronology is correct, some major rethinking of our understand-
ing of the later Pleistocene of the Middle East               is   called for.   The whole
archaeological sequence at Tabun was thought to span hand axe industries
made about 100,000 years ago, through Middle Palaeolithic industries made by
Neanderthals during the middle of the last Ice Age about 60,000 years ago, to
those made by the first early Moderns 40,000 years ago. Now it seems that the
hand axe makers lived in Tabun in an earlier interglacial period about 200,000
years ago, followed by early Neanderthals (including the Tabun woman) living
during or immediately after the last interglacial c. 110,000 years ago. Maybe
early Moderns visited the site from neighbouring Skhul about 90,000 years ago
and Neanderthals from Kebara may have camped there during the colder
period 60,000 years ago.        We do not know when the Neanderthals finally
stopped using Tabun for good, but judging from the evidence at Amud, it was
perhaps 45,000 years ago - when the transition to the Upper Palaeolithic was
beginning in the region. Evidence from the Lebanese site of Ksar Akil (such as
the burial of a modern-looking child, nicknamed 'Egbert') suggests that, by
                                                                                 23
37,000 years ago, early Moderns were back in the Levant to stay.



East and west: Moderns on the move

Comparing the Middle Eastern record with that of western Europe is both
instructive and thought-provoking, because these two areas give us the best
skeletal samples and archaeological evidence for the period between 120,000

and 50,000 years ago. For the relatively good skeletal evidence we can
presumably thank the introduction of the common practice of burial;
preservation of the archaeological evidence is largely due to the presence of
many caves, whose sediments not only contained and protected the bodies, but
also preserved the materials left behind from countless visits and occupations
by these hominids.
  But interpreting the evidence gives us quite different impressions of what is
happening in the two regions. Despite the dramatic climatic changes affecting
western Europe, there is a certain similarity between all the populations of
humans in this area, and a relative likeness too between the preserved remnants
of their behaviour over the 70,000-year period. This was probably because
western Europe was a cul-de-sac at the end of the inhabited world, with only
fairly narrow access routes from the east, none from the west or the glaciated




                                                                                                 121
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


              north, and none from the south before humans could navigate the Mediterra-
              nean. In contrast, the Middle East has been a long-lasting corridor and
              crossroads between three continents, where distinct populations of animals and
              humans have constantly alternated or coexisted in occupation. It is perhaps no
              coincidence that modern humans first appeared here accompanied by some
              species of mammals characteristic of North African and Arabian areas.
                Conditions in the Middle Eastern corridor 100,000 years ago may have
              provided the springboard for a colonization of the globe by modern humans,
              which had started with the exodus of modern-looking humans from Africa.
              This springboard involved changes in both behaviour - which would have the
              incidental result of territorial expansion   - and anatomy.     Ultimately, this
              successful combination would lead modern humans all the way to Australia
              (between 60,000 and 50,000 years ago), the western Pacific (at least 32,000 years
              ago) and the Americas (some time between 30,000 and 13,000 years ago -
              Chapter 6). A phase of dispersals beginning over 40,000 years ago finally led the
              Moderns to push into the Neanderthals' cul-de-sac of western Europe. We will
              look at the encounter between the European Neanderthals and the Moderns in
              Chapters 8 and 9, but first we will take the road south from the crossroads and
              enter the dark continent of Africa.




122
                                  CHAPTER 6

              The Dark Continent and Beyond:
                The Origin of Homo Sapiens



Where did we evolve? The last century has seen many suggestions, including
submerged continents in the Indian Ocean, the Pampas of Argentina, the
outback of Australia, the Arctic circle in Siberia and the continent of Europe
where earlier types of hominid were supposedly refined. The list of possibilities
is almost as extensive as the range    and variety of evidence used by each region's
archaeologists to support their particular claim to the cradle of modern
humanity. We will now look at the continent of Africa, which we believe has the
strongest claim to be the original          home of modern people - people who
eventually displaced the Neanderthals in Europe and Asia.



A continent comes of age
Although Africa long caught Western imaginations as the primeval continent,
its   central role in the story of human evolution was eclipsed until relatively
recently by the rival claims of Europe and the Far East. The case for the Far
East was established in the last century by Dubois' discovery in Java of
Pithecanthropus (Homo erectus), while Europe had the Neanderthals, followed
by the Mauer (Heidelberg) finds and the fraudulent remains from Piltdown.
The Broken Hill (Rhodesian man) specimen found in 1921 was the first
significant   ancient   African   to   be    identified,   but even the       subsequent
australopithecine find from Taung which followed three years later did little to
focus European and American attention on Africa.           1
                                                               The general feeling at this
time was that Darwin could conceivably have been right about Africa being the
original hominid homeland since it was also the homeland of our close relatives,
the African apes. But it was thought that once early hominids had spread from
Africa, this continent    would always have lagged behind Europe and Asia,
isolated   and backward. Even the archaeological evidence which began to
emerge in the 1930s from sites such as Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania failed to
change such preconceptions because - before the advent of radiometric dating
techniques - it was not known that some of the hand axes discovered by the
Leakeys at Olduvai were in fact over twice the age of those found in the terraces
of the Thames and Somme rivers. At a much later date, the Middle Stone Age
of southern Africa was correlated with the Upper Palaeolithic of Europe, to
which it seemed a rather poor relation, whereas we will see in Chapter 7 that it is
more appropriately correlated with the Middle Palaeolithic (Mousterian) to the
north, and is certainly no poor relation.




                                                                                             123
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND! THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



                 It is only since the 1960s that Africa has begun to claim its rightful place in

              human evolutionary history. First came the absolute dates for the Olduvai
              hominid finds of 'Zinjanthropus boise? (now known as Paranthropus boisei, see
              Chapter 3) and Homo habilis, and then followed the remarkable series of
              discoveries at fossil and archaeological sites such as East Turkana and Hadar. 2
              But the feeling still persisted that all the key events in the story of modern
              human origins took place elsewhere.


              Middle Pleistocene Africans
              Until as recently as 1977, some scholars maintained that the Broken Hill find
              from Zambia dated to only 50,000 years ago (pi. 60). 3 It is now believed to be
              about 200,000 years old or more, and thus belongs to the middle Pleistocene.
              The middle Pleistocene record of Africa also includes related hominids from
              sites such as Bodo in Ethiopia and Elandsfontein (Saldanha) in South Africa,

              which are perhaps double the age of Broken Hill. 4 These hominids, like their
              approximate contemporaries in Europe, are often assigned to 'archaic Homo
              sapiens* or the subspeciesHomo sapiens rhodesiensis* (rhodesiensis was the
                                            k




              species name which Arthur Smith Woodward originally gave to the Broken
              Hill skull in 1921). 5 Like their European counterparts from Arago in France
              and Petralona in Greece (Chapter 3), these ancient Africans are neither sapiens
              in the modern sense,     nor are they true erectus. They have sometimes been
              regarded as African Neanderthals, and while this is a little more plausible, they
              are not Neanderthal in the European sense either.
                 What the African fossils share is a brain size larger than typical erectus,
              housed in a flat, long but more elevated braincase, expanded higher up in the
              parietal region. In rear view they resemble the outline of a conventional house
              as opposed to the rather sagging tent shape of erectus, the slightly squashed
              sphere of Neanderthals, and the distinctive modern form of a house wider
              across the roof than the ground floor. 6 The very strong bar of bone across the
              occipital in erectus is somewhat reduced but still present, and some individuals
              e.g. Bodo retained very thick skull walls (pi. 61). The face, known from the
              Bodo and Broken Hill fossils, is huge and especially wide across the orbits,
              which tend to be low and more rectangular than those of Neanderthals and
              many Moderns. The nose is wide as in Neanderthals but, more like erectus, it is
              flatter and lower, taking up less of the total facial height. The face projects

              overall, especially in Bodo, but in Broken Hill (as in Petralona) it is tucked in
              under the braincase to resemble the Neanderthals or Moderns. The brow ridge
              is bigger than in Neanderthals but,  much as Petralona and the Neanderthals, it
              is hollowed over   much of its width by an extensive frontal sinus (air chamber).
              This seems to indicate that these Ancients needed large brow ridges more for
              their outside   dimensions than for their inner strength and bone mass (see
              Chapter 4).
                 We have little information about the rest of the skeleton, although some of
              the other human bones from Broken Hill may belong with the 1921 skull or a




124
                                     75,000
                                                                               MODERN
                                    years ago
                                                                          HOMO SAPIENS
                                                                                   • Klasies
                                                      \      Border
                                                              Cave


                                     100,000
                                    years ago                 \
                                                                  \
                                                                      N# Klasies



                                     200.000
                                    years ago
                                                   Broken Hill (Kabwe)   #
                                                     \

                                                      \                        ARCHAIC
                                                         \               HOMO SAPIENS • Ndutu /
                                                             V Elandsfontfljn ^<0M^&        /




                                                             Howieson'sPoort

                                         Klasies River Mouth




42   Map of Africa showing some important middle and late Pleistocene hominid sites; the
        diagram above it shows the possible evolutionary position of these hominids.




                                                                                                  125
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              member of the same general population. 7 Most notably a thick midshaft of a
              femur and a complete shin bone (tibia) were found near the skull. They show a
              very interesting combination of features because, even though they are both
              thick-walled, the femur fragment               is   shaped more     like   a   modern than a
              Neanderthal one. This means it is widest front to back, rather than nearly
              circular in cross-section as    it   is   in   Neanderthals. The tibia indicates that it
              belonged to a very tall individual, probably over 1.8 m (6 ft) tall, with body
              proportions more similar to the 1.6 million-year-old West Turkana boy (known
              variously as      Homo erectus or Homo ergaster) and modern Africans, than to
              Neanderthals or more recent populations in temperate or cold areas.
                The Broken Hill remains therefore have a special significance. For example,
              despite the robusticity of the bones and their large joint surfaces, when scaled
              against height they indicate a more linear and narrower physique than that of
              Neanderthals. 8 Unfortunately, neither of the two pelvic fragments from
              Broken Hill can be clearly associated with the main skull. One is from a male,
              the other a female. They are also too incomplete to indicate how much they
              differed from those of Neanderthals, although one does show a clear primitive
              feature in the vertical bar of bone running up from the hip socket. This is also
              found in far more ancient African fossil hip bones and in the early European
              pelvis from Arago in southern France (Chapter 3). 9 In summary we can say that
              these middle Pleistocene Africans were strongly built by modern standards, in
              some ways more primitive anatomically than us or the Neanderthals, yet there
              are hints in the limb bones that in certain respects they are a little closer to us
              than the Neanderthals were. Only more complete skeletons will sharpen our
              conclusions, but since these African Ancients did not seem to practice cave
              burial, we will have to depend on the sort of preservation and lucky discovery
              which yielded the much older, marvellously well-preserved West Turkana
              skeleton already mentioned.
                There are other African fossils that date from the period 500,000-200,000
              years ago, but they are more difficult to relate to the fossils we have already
                           10
              discussed.        These include two partial jaws from Baringo in Kenya, which
              resemble such European fossils as Mauer and Arago 13, particularly in their
              thick bone and lack of chin. Rather more puzzling is the partial skull from
              Ndutu in Tanzania, which is perhaps 400,000 years old. While this might have
              been from a contemporary of the Bodo male, the skull seems quite different in
              shape and more modern. 11 The brow ridge was certainly prominent, and the
              skull quite thick.     Yet the braincase            is   rather shorter and apparently less
              flattened. The face is very incomplete, but it is smaller and the cheek region is
              more delicate than in Broken Hill or Bodo. One explanation is that this is
              merely due to variation       in the      population through time and space, or to
              differences in gender. According to the latter view, Ndutu would be a female.
              This theory is supported by a second fragment of upper jaw from the Broken
              Hill cave which isuncertainly dated, but is less robust than that of the skull, and
              has a more modern-looking cheek region. Further north, in Morocco, there is
              evidence of a similar middle Pleistocene population from the sites of Sale and




126
                               THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



the Thomas Quarries, although here they seem to have comparatively small
                                                                               12
brains and large teeth for an otherwise anatomically advanced form.


Family relationships
If the Broken Hill remains are indeed distinct from true Homo erectus, modern
sapiens,    and the Neanderthals, can they be grouped with any other fossil
specimens? This is a very difficult question, but there is no doubt that there are
strong resemblances to their European counterparts represented by the Mauer,
                                 13
Petralona and Arago finds.
  Perhaps all these remains can be assigned to Homo heidelbergensis (named
after the site of the Mauer discovery, as we saw in Chapter 3).          This species
would have been a descendant of the original African early Homo erectus or
Homo ergaster, and a probable ancestor for both the Neanderthals in the north
and modern sapiens in Africa. The evolutionary split must have been under way
by 200,000 years ago to judge by the Neanderthal-like Ehringsdorf remains and
perhaps even earlier according to some Swanscombe dates. If this widespread
Ancient, Homo heidelbergensis, evolved into Homo sapiens in Africa, where is the
evidence of that transition ?



The transition to modern humans
Southern Africa
We can trace this evolutionary process in various parts of Africa and perhaps
even in the Middle East, at Zuttiyeh. 14           From South Africa there is the
Florisbad 'skull' (really only fragments) which has a broad             flat   forehead,
moderate brow ridge, and a short, flat and broad face. The braincase is thick,
but overall       it   seems to have   a reasonable 'transitional'   shape. Its age   is

uncertain, but appears to lie between 200,000 and 100,000 years; archaeological
associations are with a late hand axe industry or the early Middle Stone Age.         A
damaged lower jaw from the Cave of Heaths, Makapansgat, South Africa is
similar in age, quite small, and has a hint of a chin at the front. From Tanzania,
close to Olduvai Gorge, the Ngaloba site at Laetoli produced a rather odd skull
in 1978 (pi. 64). This has retained part of the lower face, and is sufficiently

complete to indicate a brain size of about 1,350 ml (fully modern in size), a
rounded rear, and a rather small but continuous brow ridge. Yet the forehead is
very flattened and narrow, and the braincase relatively long and low. The ear
region     is   even reminiscent of that of Neanderthals.      The lower face, like
Florisbad and the Broken Hill fragment, is broad and flat, with hollowed cheek
bones. This Ngaloba skull is dated at about 130,000 years old and is associated
with very early Middle Stone Age artifacts. Some researchers actually regard
Ngaloba as an early Modern, but we prefer to call it a borderline Modern.

North Africa
Also close to the borderline are the specimens from a Moroccan cave at Jebel
Irhoud. Here five different specimens have been found: a nearly complete skull




                                                                                           127
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              (Irhoud i); a braincase (Irhoud 2); a child's mandible (Irhoud 3); a humerus -
              upper arm - fragment (Irhoud 4); and a fragment of hip bone (Irhoud 5). The
              humerus fragment is small but very robust, and the jaw combines big teeth with
              a rather delicate framework and a slight chin. The two skulls show strange

              blends of characteristics (pis. 66-68). The most complete skull (Irhoud 1) has a
              rather primitive braincase with a big broad face, but nevertheless looks quite
              modern in shape. The second skull (Irhoud 2) is so 'transitional' that it was
              originally believed to be from two different individuals, one with a modern
              front, the other with a primitive rear. Eventually enough of the parts in between
              were found to show that there was only one braincase, apparently a genuine
              example of evolution caught in the act of turning an Ancient into a Modern.
                    Until recently these Irhoud pieces had no reliable age estimate. All that
              could be said was that they seemed to belong with stone tools which would not
              have been out of place among the Neanderthals or the early Moderns of Israel.
              Traditionally such tools were dated to the early part of the last glacial cycle, but
              we saw in Chapter 5 that these estimates are often very inaccurate; this may also
              have been the case at Jebel Irhoud. The ESR results from animal teeth
              unearthed in levels near the human fossils suggest a date of between 100,000
              and 200,000 years. 15 Such age estimates place the fossils firmly back into the
              earlier Middle Palaeolithic/Middle Stone Age.

                    ESR techniques have also been applied to animal teeth found near the Singa
              braincase from the Sudan, giving a similar age range to Jebel Irhoud. This
              strange fossil was discovered encased in limestone in the banks of the Blue Nile.
              Because of its bizarre shape it had been regarded as that of an early 'Bushman'
              or Khoisan, and was believed to prove that this southern African 'race' was
              once widespread across Africa. Now it seems that the Singa skull was a peculiar
              member of a population like the one at Jebel Irhoud. The owner of the skull
              seems to have been a long-term sufferer of a disease which affected bone growth
              (perhaps a blood disorder), and this made the parietal region grow thicker and
              broader than normal. The skull base and ear region also bear peculiarities.


              East Africa
              East Africa has produced three further examples of these early borderline
              people.
                        16
                             From Omo Kibish in southern Ethiopia comes a braincase (Omo 2,
              pi.   63) supposedly about 130,000 years old which, like the Irhoud specimen,
              has a more Modern front and an Ancient back. But here the back is not so much
              'primitive' in the sense of being like a Neanderthal or Ndutu, but rather bears a
              more direct resemblance to the much older Ancient, Homo erectus. The brain
              size, however, was at least 1,400 ml and the shape from the rear is like a

              heightened version of Broken Hill. Although the front is damaged there is
              hardly a brow ridge at all. Further south, just over the Kenyan border on the
              eastern side of Lake Turkana, a fragmentary upper jaw, and the front and back
              of a skull have been found at Guomde. This skull, called by its find number
              KNM-ER 3884, has a shape in rear view like the Omo braincase, but the profile
              of the skull is distinctly more modern and curved, although the brow ridge is




128
                                     THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



strong. Separately, a modern-looking femur             (KNM-ER 999) was also found.
Not far away, another skull was found by some tourists on the western shore of
Lake Turkana at Eliye Springs. The face was somewhat eroded, but clearly
resembles those from Irhoud, Ngaloba and Florisbad. In this fossil (KNM-ES
1   1693), the braincase        is   large but very broad,   and could hardly be called
modern. Like the Guomde skull, its age is uncertain.


The first appearance of early modern humans
The transitional group or borderline Moderns we have just discussed display
modern characteristics in a disparate way: they are not all combined in any
single specimen. It        is   not until around 100,000 years ago that the shorter,
rounder skull, smaller brow ridge and face, prominent chin, and lighter skeletal
build - the hallmarks of modern human populations - appear consistently
              17
together.          Let us examine some examples.


East Africa
We saw in Chapter 5 that modern characteristics were combined in certain
skeletons from the Middle East (e.g. Skhul and Qafzeh), but perhaps the oldest
of all such specimens is a partial skeleton from Omo Kibish in Ethiopia (pi.
63).
       I8
            We have already mentioned a braincase (Omo 2) found in the same
region, but the skeleton was discovered in 1967 at a similar level, about 2 km
away. It was one of Richard Leakey's first important fossil finds, although it has
since been overshadowed by his later spectacular successes in the Turkana area
of Kenya. Nevertheless, with an age of well over 40,000 years, and perhaps as
much as 130,000 years, this fossil is in some ways as significant as any of his
other discoveries. The skull is quite complete at the back, and is large and
rather thick-boned. However, it is very modern in shape - both in side and rear
views. The front of the skull is less complete, but there is enough bone to show a
broad and rather flat forehead, and a brow ridge which is thick at the centre but
thin at the sides. The face is missing save for a piece of modern-looking cheek
bone, and there are fragments of the lower jaw which show a clear chin. There
are also fragments of various limb bones which indicate a tall, well-built male
individual who was not significantly different in body form from East Africans
of today. 19 Exactly how the Omo skeleton relates to the more primitive Omo 2
braincase found such a short distance away is likely to remain unclear until
further work can be carried out at the site or it becomes possible to date the
fossils more directly. However, the  Guomde skull mentioned earlier could be
from a related population of early modern people; it combines features of both
specimens, and the femur from Guomde looks quite modern.


Southern Africa
At the southern tip of Africa, human occupation of the complex of caves at
Klasies River Mouth stretches back to the last interglacial, 120,000-130,000
years ago. 20 The early inhabitants lived on top of marine and wind-blown sand




                                                                                           129
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              deposits, where they made Middle Stone Age artifacts, lit fires, and processed
              meat, plants and shellfish (Chapter 7). Fragmentary human bones only give us
              glimpses of what these people looked like. A forehead piece from the site has a
              brow ridge of completely modern type and there are thin-boned skull and jaw
              pieces and elements of modern-looking arm and foot bones. The jaw bones vary
              greatly in size, probably reflecting gender differences, and there is also variation
              in the extent of chin development. Overall, however, these pieces - ranging in
              age from 70,000 to about 120,000 years old - are very close to an anatomically
              modern pattern. The fragmentary nature of the bones and the burning and cut
              marks on some of them have led to suggestions of cannibalism at Klasies; such
              theories, however, are very difficult to confirm.
                 Four additional human fossils believed to date from the South African
              Middle Stone Age are those from Border Cave. 21 Unfortunately, an incomplete
              skull and parts of limb bones (Border Cave 1, pi. 65) and a lower jaw (Border
              Cave 2) were found by archaeologists in a dump created by a farmer who
              mistakenly thought that the cave sediments would make good fertilizer!
              Although the dumps were also full of Middle Stone Age artifacts, it cannot now
              be shown whether the human fossils originally came from the same level as the
              artifacts   because the bones contain insufficient collagen to give an accurate
              radiocarbon date. The skull and limb bones are from a well-built individual by
              comparison with most present-day South African blacks or Khoisan. The jaw
              is   much more delicate and very like those of modern populations, which is also
              true of two further finds excavated under better conditions from Middle Stone
              Age levels: a partial infant's skeleton (Border Cave 3) and another partial lower
              jaw (Border Cave 5). (Incidentally, Border Cave 4 was an Iron Age skeleton
              from the uppermost levels of the cave deposits.) Assuming that the remains
              were attributed to the correct levels, the radiocarbon and ESR dates for the
              Middle Stone Age levels suggest that the fossils are probably all more than
              50,000 years old, and Border Cave 1, 2 and 3 could be more than 80,000 years
                   22
              old.    The possibility still persists, however, that the Border Cave bones may
              have been intrusive burials in the Middle Stone Age levels. 23 Only much more
              sophisticated direct dating of the bones or the discovery of more human
              remains from indisputable Middle Stone Age contexts can solve the problems
              of Border Cave. But regardless of the lingering question mark over the true age
              of the Border Cave human remains, the site itself has been a very significant
              source of information about the Middle Stone Age from the tens of thousands
              of artifacts already found there.


              North Africa
              The date of the first appearance of modern humans in North Africa has been
              very difficult to establish, partly due to the scarcity of fossils more recent than
              the Jebel Irhoud remains, and partly because of doubts about the age of the
                                                                                          24
              distinctive Aterian industry found over much of the area (Chapter 7).            The
              tanged projectile points so characteristic of the Aterian are believed by some
              workers to date from well over 70,000 years ago and are therefore equivalent to




130
                            THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



the earlier European Middle Palaeolithic. This is based on a series of absolute
dates from sites such as Bir Tarfawi in the Egyptian Sahara. Other scholars,
however, especially French ones, subscribe instead to radiocarbon and TL
dates for the Aterian      which suggest that    it is 40,000 years old or less,

equivalent to the earliest Upper Palaeolithic.    Perhaps the final answer to the
age of the Aterian will be similar to the revised estimates of the duration of the
African Middle Stone       Age and the European Middle Palaeolithic. If that
is   so, we   may be looking at a stone-working complex spanning 100,000 years
and associated with a variety of fossil hominids: Ancients, borderlines and
Moderns.
     All this may seem rather peripheral to the question of when modern people
appeared in North Africa, but it is not, because the Aterian site of Dar-es-
Soltan in Morocco has produced the remains of several robustly built but
modern-looking individuals. 25 Most of the fossils are still unpublished, but the
Dar-es-Soltan 5 skull and lower jaw have been the subject of a preliminary
description, and are in various ways said to resemble the more primitive Irhoud
fossils,   the later Moderns in North Africa and Europe, and even recent sub-
Saharan populations. If these Dar-es-Soltan fossils really date from more than
70,000 years ago, they would be of great importance in the story of modern
human origins. But whatever their age, they hint at long-term regional
continuity in North Africa, seeming to link the borderline Moderns of Irhoud
with the late Pleistocene Afalou and Taforalt populations. The latter groups,
along with a 33,000-year-old skull from Nazlet Khater in Egypt, are the North
African equivalents of the European Cro-Magnons: robustly built and showing
mixtures of 'racial' features which are nowadays found scattered across the
populations of the world. Their teeth and limb proportions, however, seem to
mark them clearly as Africans.


Beyond the bones
The fossil evidence we have discussed so far in this chapter builds a case for a
morphological transition right across Africa between Ancients and early
Moderns via the borderline Moderns some time before 100,000 years ago, and
certainly well before the Upper Palaeolithic (or Late Stone Age) which began
c .40,000 years ago. We have seen throughout the last few chapters that we can

no longer expect (as others before us did) that anatomy and behaviour - as
indicated in the archaeological record - go hand in hand. The earliest
anatomically modern specimens of Africa and the Levant may have looked like
us in many ways, but they were not us. They lack the 100,000 years of change
which have made us what we are today. This leaves us with one of the big
questions concerning our origins, why then did these populations look so much
like us?

     Evidently they must have found ways to reduce the heavy demands made on
the skeletons of the Ancients in their everyday activities (stresses       which
probably resulted, in populations such as the Neanderthals, in the evolutionary




                                                                                     131
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              pressure to develop and maintain robusticity). 26 Maybe the pattern of modern
              behavioural complexity, supported by better memory, language and planning
              depth, had already moved from the drawing board to the prototype stage. If
              this is granted, it becomes possible to imagine how cultural behaviour fostered

              solutions to survival which were previously solved by muscular means and high
              activity. Thus physical endurance and strength would have been replaced by

              mental anticipation and problem-solving through social and technical means.
                 Whether or not this was the mechanism for the evolution of modern human
              anatomy we simply do not know. The driving forces behind the evolutionary
              transition to modern-looking people could also have involved climatic change,
              geographical isolation, behavioural or social innovations, or some combination
              of these and other influences. Teasing out the critical factors is going to require
              both new discoveries and new thinking. We present our thoughts on this crucial
              question in Chapter 9.



              The genetic revolution in modern human origins
              In fact, new discoveries and new thinking have already had a great impact on
              the field of human genetics. When the Out of Africa 2 theory began to take
              shape from the emerging fossil and dating evidence around 1980, there was
              little support from studies of living peoples (whether from their bones, teeth or

              their hereditary material, the genes). The bones and teeth studied from large
              samples of skulls and dentitions by such scholars as William Howells and
              Christy Turner respectively, suggested that all living peoples were closely
              related,   but showed an approximate north/south division. 27 Europeans,
              Mongoloids (East Asians) and native Americans were similar and formed one
              group, while Africans and Australians formed another. The geneticists on the
              other hand, working with the limited data about inherited characteristics
              available at the time (predominantly that of blood groups), proposed a primary
                                                                                          28
              east/west division, that is Africa and Europe versus the Far East.
                In 1974, the geneticists Masatoshi Nei and Arun Roychoudhury advanced
              yet another theory.    They found that differences between the protein and
              enzyme material of Europeans and Mongoloids were fairly small, suggesting
              that the two populations were quite closely related. Differences between these
              peoples and black African populations, however, were much greater; this
                                                                                         29
              indicated   that   Africans   had   a   longer   evolutionary   history.         Nei and
              Roychoudury even proposed a date for the original split between Africans and
              the rest (about 110,000 years ago) and a date of c. 40,000 years ago for the
              European/Mongoloid split. Hardly anyone took any notice. But thirteen years
              later, research originating at Berkeley in California drew comparable

              conclusions, this time with a much greater impact.


              Human mitochondrial DNA
              Our hereditary material is made up of chains of genes consisting of a chemical
              called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Mitochondria (the tiny structures which




132
                             THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




                    Some Characteristics of Mitochondrial DNA


         • Mitochondria are small units which generate energy.
         • They exist independently of the cell nucleus, and have their own
           DNA (mtDNA).
         • This mtDNA has a rapid rate of evolution that is apparently quite
           constant over time; recombination with other genes does not
           occur.
         • Moreover most or all mtDNA is inherited from the mother; the
           mtDNA of a male generally dies with him.
         • Since new variation only occurs through mutation, at a seemingly
           constant rate, and through one parent only, mtDNA is a good
           candidate for charting population histories.




power our cells) contain a special form of DNA, known as mitochrondrial DNA
or mtDNA. The large    mtDNA molecule was singled out as a promising tool for
studying short-term evolutionary changes because of its peculiar mode of
inheritance: this    DNA, unlike any other in our bodies, is not inherited equally
from both parents via the chromosomes in the nuclei of our cells, but largely or
wholly from the mother, from the egg. This means that the origin of our
mtDNA potentially stretches without interruption via a whole series of
mothers into the distant past.
   As mtDNA is copied it sometimes suffers mutations or changes, accumu-
lated at about ten times the rate of our normal DNA. Since these distinct
mutations are copied from mother to child, they can be used to trace particular
lineages. As time passes, each lineage will accumulate more and more
mutations; the number of mutations or differences between them can therefore
provide a theoretical measure of evolutionary antiquity i.e. the greater the
diversity of mtDNA, the greater the amount of evolutionary change has taken
place. Following the mutations back along the family lineages must eventually
lead to acommon, hypothetical ancestress for all people alive today, often
known as Eve or 'our lucky mother'.
  When human mtDNA began to be studied in detail during the 1970s, it
became clear that all human mtDNA was basically very similar, suggesting that
only a few mutational differences had had time to build up between the major
geographical populations or 'races'. This implies that their common origin
could not have been far back in the past. When defined genetically, therefore,
modern humans seem to be recent in origin. To demonstrate that modern
humans originated within the Pleistocene, University of California at Berkeley
biochemists Rebecca Cann (pi. 98) and Allan Wilson proposed that mtDNA in
all   animals changed at a constant rate of about 3 per cent per million years.
Initial studies     suggested, working backwards from today, that the original




                                                                                     133
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




                                                                    43   The controversial tree of
                                                                    mitochondrial   DNA relationships
                                                                    published by Cann, Stoneking and
                                                                    Wilson in Nature, 1987. It shows in
                                                                    diagrammatic form the genetic
                                                                    divergence between modern humans,
                                                                    whose ancestors came from Africa,
                                                                    Asia, Australia, New Guinea and
                                                                    Europe. As well as suggesting a clear
                                                                    split between African and non-

                                                                    African groups, it reconstructed a
                                                                    hypothetical female ancestor for all
                                                                    modern mtDNA types; she was
                                                                    African and lived around 200,000
                                                                    years ago.
                     0.2   0.4   0.6   0.6   0.4   0.2
                           Sequence divergence %




              common ancestress of all people lived about 400,000 years ago, during the last
              days of the species Homo erectus. 30 Thus, the subsequent evolution of modern
              people was probably a world-wide, multiregional process.
                Subsequent, more detailed research, however, has not only more than halved
              the estimated age of Eve, but has also indicated that she most probably came
              from Africa. For African lineages revealed more diverse types of mtDNA than
              any other present-day populations, which suggests that they had more time to
              develop such mutations. 31 The lineages of Europeans, Asians, New Guineans
              and Australians seemed to show far fewer mutations and therefore a much
              younger date of differentiation. This conformed neatly with the Out of Africa 2
              model, although an origin of roughly 200,000 years ago and a dispersal from
              there about 100,000 years ago seemed too ancient compared with the fossil
              evidence. The date of the earliest known modern humans in Africa still appears
              too early to match the               mtDNA estimate (since the oldest fossil remains
              probably date to 130,000 years); but we now have ESR and TL dates from
              Skhul and Qafzeh which do seem to show early modern people in western Asia,
              adjacent to Africa at around 100,000 years ago, as we saw in Chapter 5. 32 Thus
              we have evidence of a genetic migration from the African centre.

              Second thoughts on mtDNA
              Genetic support for the Out of Africa 2 model of modern human origins has,
              not surprisingly, been attacked by supporters of multiregional evolutionary
              continuity. Their arguments against            mtDNA calibration have mostly focused



134
                                                                                      -

                                  THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



on the accuracy and consistency of the rate of genetic mutation. Different parts
of the mtDNA molecule evolve at different rates, meaning there is much debate
about the appropriate rate to use, and indeed whether it is even very constant.
(The use of chimpanzee mtDNA data to calibrate human DNA divergences
has also been challenged.) Given the uncertain rate of change, multiregionalists
argue that the pattern of dispersals could just as well fit the spread of Homo
erectus from Africa i million years ago as that of modern humans from Africa
much more recently. 33
   Furthermore, the computer program PAUP (Phylogenetic Analysis Using
Parsimony) used by Cann, Wilson and their colleagues is unable to prove
conclusively an African origin from present             mtDNA data. Much more
information will be needed to be able to demonstrate this, although the results
of PAUP and other analytical techniques continue to favour an African origin
over any other.
   On the other hand, new analyses of mtDNA derived from chimpanzee data
and from recent human colonizations (for example in New Guinea) suggest
that the human       mtDNA ancestor most probably lived between 140,000 and
130,000 years ago (although it is admitted that a wide range of dates is possible
from as long ago as 400,000 years ago to as recently as 60,000 years ago), which
does concur reasonably well with the available fossil evidence for the earliest
modern fossils. 34

Nuclear DNA
The conclusions from mtDNA databases on a total of some 5,000 modern
individuals are strongly supported by the even larger one now building up for


                                                                            IV                 VI    VII
44 Scientist Luigi Luca
Cavalli-Sforza and his                                                           co
                                                           CO                             CO
colleagues compiled a family tree                          c                     %                  •0
                                                           CO                             CD        c
on the basis of the products of                                        CO
                                                                                 3        Oc        CO
                                               CO
                                               -0          3           c
                                                                       CO                 CO
                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                    c
nuclear DNA.   They found that                                         -0
                                                                                 to       V)        CO
                                               CO          1
                                                           CD
                                                                       _c
                                                                                 CO
                                                                                 CD
                                                                                          .0
modern humans are divided into                 co                                .c                 2
                                                           r           CD
                                                                       E
                                                                                                    to
                                                                                                    3
seven major groups, with a                     CO                                         CO
                                                           z           <                  a.        <
primary split between Africans
and non-Africans and another
Eurasian! South Asian split.




                                               Rootstock of Homo sapiens




                                                                                                           135
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              normal (nuclear)   DNA and     its products (such as blood groups and enzymes). 35

              This work generally shows hierarchical clustering (that is, nested clusters)
              which indicate a primary African/non-African split and a secondary Eurasian/
              Southeast Asian split (fig. 44). In other words, the implication is that modern
              humans originated in Africa, and a population later dispersed from there which
              in turn split in Asia. One descendant group gave rise to present-day Europeans,
              Mediterranean peoples, Indians, native Americans, Inuits and East Asians,
              and the other group to Southeast Asians and Polynesians as well as Australians
              and New Guineans. According to this research, the origin of all the diversity in
              the nuclear   DNA of modern humans could be even more recent than that of the
              mtDNA: the ancestral population would probably have lived in Africa about
              100,000 years ago, much in line with Nei and Roychoudhury's 1974 estimate. 36
              So this calibration, also, suggests an African genetic origin for modern people,
              long after the time of Homo erectus, and even after the differentiation of the
              Neanderthals. Once again, supporters of multiregional evolution question the
              calibration, but none of them have so far produced any alternative evidence that
              can convincingly tie the relationships of the middle Pleistocene Europe and
              Asia fossils to the genetic patterns      now reconstructed for recent human
              evolution.
                A final point about nuclear DNA calibrations is that in several analyses, the
              genetic differentiation within areas such as Australia and New Guinea is about
              40 per cent of the total human variation, and the Americas about 20 per cent.
              Since Australia and New Guinea were probably colonized about 60,000—
              50,000 years ago and the Americas probably less than 30,000 years ago, and
              assuming     a constant rate   of genetic diversification, the whole of human
              variation could have arisen in the last 150,000 years. This is consistent with the
              Out of Africa 2 model (rather than an origin 1 million years ago or more as
              proposed by the multiregional camp).



              New light on the dark continent
              To summarize, we have seen how Africa has moved from a marginal position in
              the story of modern human origins to a central one. An excellent fossil sequence
              records an evolutionary metamorphosis from ancient specimens such as Bodo
              and Broken Hill, through transitional ones such as Ngaloba and Jebel Irhoud,
              to early modern forms like those from Klasies, Border Cave and Omo Kibish.
              The dating of these fossil samples is now more accurate, apparently indicating
              that the transition to modern humans had        happened by 100,000 years ago,
              during the African Middle Stone Age (equivalent to the European Middle
              Palaeolithic). But was this transition unique to the African continent as the Out
              of Africa 2 model would imply, or was it part of a world-wide multiregional
              transformation? The greater age now being assigned to African transitional
              specimens such as Ngaloba, Singa and Irhoud certainly hints at an evolutionary
              precedence for Africa, and this is supported by the lack of evidence for
              comparably early transitions in other regions of the world.




136
                                  THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



   Years          AFRICA                              EURASIA                              EAST ASIA/AUSTRALASIA
    ago
             Afalou                                                                 Zhoukoudian
   30,000                                    Cro-Magnon       i                                               Mungo        WLH-50
                                             Mladed               Saint-Cesaire
                       Modern                Ksar Akil
                                                              |




                                                              I   Le Moustier                           Niah
                 Homo sapiens                                 J
   50,000                                [
                                             Amud                 La Chapelle
                                         i   Kebara               Guattari
             Border Cave                 l




  100,000    Klasies     Guomde              SkhQI            Neanderthals
             Omo Kibish                      Qafzeh                                 Xujiayao                               Ngandong
                                             TabQn                Saccopastore      Maba
             Jebel Irhoud Ngaloba L                      j
                                                                  Krapina           Dali
                                                                  Biache
                                 Archaic Homo                   Ehringsdorf
             Broken Hi          sapiens" or Homo
                                                             _ _§^B ns c_qrnb e _
                                heidelbergensis
  250,000                                                         Atapuerca         Jinniu Shan           |   Hexian       Ngawi
                                                                  Petralona
             Elandsfontein       Ndutu                            Bilzingsleben                   r-      1



             Bodo Sale                                            Arago             Yunxian       [     Zhoukoudian    Sambungmachan
  500,000    Baringo                                              Mauer
             Olduvai fernifine                                                                          Lantian        Sangiran
11,000,000   Olduvai                                  Dmanisi                               Homo erectus


45 Possible classification of some of the fossil hominids of the later Pleistocene.




   Genetic data provide an independent source of information and largely
favour an       Out of Africa            2   interpretation;          the    calibration     is       critical    in

differentiating between the original dispersal out of Africa of Homo erectus and
the much later exodus of early modern people. The larger genetic diversity
between Africans is certainly suggestive of a relatively greater antiquity for
African differentiation, while the overall low level globally of genetic diversity
in humans (in both         mtDNA and nuclear DNA) favours a recent origin, most
probably within the last 150,000 years. So, even though there is still much to
explain concerning the rate and                      mechanism of mutation in nuclear and
mitochondrial DNA, the weight of genetic evidence is very much on the side of
the Out of Africa 2 model. 37 While                   mtDNA has been used (very controver-
sially) to   suggest that there was a complete replacement by the Moderns of
populations of Ancients such as Neanderthals and the Asian descendants of
Homo erectus following an Out of Africa 1 dispersal, 38 the nuclear DNA results
cannot be used so definitively. We do not know, and may never know, to what
extent there was intermixture between the new peoples and the Ancients -
though the European evidence, as we will see in Chapter 8, does help to
illuminate the answer to this question.



Modern humans in the Far East and Australia
We have seen in this chapter that Africa has yielded evidence of the anatomical
transition     between ancient and modern humans, and we                               will discuss the




                                                                                                                                    137
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND! THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




                                    Racial Features and the Epicanthic Fold



                     Modern humans around the world vary greatly in physical
                     appearance, and this can be partly related to the environment in
                     which their ancestors lived. 39 We have already discussed how
                     differences in human body shape can be correlated with hot or cold
                     environments; such characteristics are inherited, so that after
                     forced or voluntary migration Afro-Americans still retain an
                     'African'    physique, while white Australians retain their basic
                     European body shape. Although individual skin colour is subject to
                     some variation (for example from sun tanning) this too is predomi-
                     nantly an inherited characteristic, as we can see from the same
                     Afro-American and Australian examples. So variations in modern
                     skin colour are undoubtedly related to the different levels of
                     ultraviolet (UV) light in sunlight to which populations were exposed
                     in the past. Although excessive exposure causes skin cell damage,
                     which can lead to skin cancers (the highest reported level today is
                     in white Australians), UV light is used by special cells under the skin

                     to synthesize essential vitamin D, which may not always be
                     obtained in sufficient quantities from the diet (leading to diseases
                     such as rickets). Different human pigmentation levels (and there-
                     fore skin colours) are the result of compromises between the need
                     for protection from excess UV (in intense sunlight) and the
                     requirements of the body for vitamin D synthesis (towards the poles
                     sunlight and UV levels are reduced). Tropical populations thus
                     need higher protection from UV damage and can afford to be dark-
                     skinned because they should still receive sufficient UV for vitamin D
                     production, while high-latitude populations need to be relatively
                     unpigmented to get the full benefit from reduced UV levels, with
                     little   risk of skin damage.
                        A more puzzling 'racial' feature is the epicanthic eye fold found
                     on the upper eyelids of most East Asian people (Mongoloids). This




              European evidence in Chapters 8 and 9; but what of other regions of the world?
              Vast areas of India and Southeast Asia are still virtually terra incognita to the
              palaeoanthropologist, but China, Java and Australia have produced important
              data on modern human origins.


              China
              The fossils from Dali (pi. 76) and Maba, which may date from between 200,000
              and 100,000 years ago, are certainly not borderline Moderns of the sort known
              from Africa at the same period, but neither are they as primitive as Peking Man
              or as specialized as the Neanderthals. 40   We do not know when modern people
              first appeared in China, but the remains of several individuals excavated from

              the Upper Cave at Zhoukoudian, and now believed to be about 25,000 years




138
                             THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




         extra fold of skin obscures part of the eye surface nearest to the
         nose. The fold is also common in native Americans and Polyne-
         sians (presumably indicating a close genetic relationship to East
         Asians) and in Khoisan peoples of southern Africa (where it
         definitely does not). One theory has been that the Asian eye fold
         was selected to provide protection against the cold, since the skin
         fold contains a potentially insulating layer of fat, as well as
         protecting the eyes from the glare (reflected sunlight and UV) of
         snow-covered ground. However, this idea does not account for the
         Khoisan eyefold (unless it is for protection from desert sun glare),
         nor for its general presence in Down's Syndrome children - of
         whatever race - who have abnormal chromosomes which affect
         facial growth before birth. An important clue to the origin of the
         feature is that most foetuses have an epicanthic fold which
         gradually disappears before birth or during the first years of life, but
         in Down's Syndrome children and in the adults of certain popula-

         tions the eyefold persists. The most clearly correlated feature is
         upper facial flatness and minimal development of a prominent
         nasal bridge between the eyes. As European children develop after
         birth, the nose and middle of the face become more prominent, but
         this does not happen in Down's Syndrome individuals or oriental
         populations, so it seems that the eyefold may just represent the
         normal form of the eye in humans whose upper nose is very flat.
         Facial flatness itself could be related to climatic adaptation, or it
         may simply be a feature retained from the earliest modern
         humans and their immediate African ancestors who had very flat
         faces. We surmise, therefore, that epicanthic folds were common
         in early modern people and our African ancestors, but were
         almost certainly not found in the Neanderthals with their beaky
         noses.




old,   do not look like intermediates between ancient and modern Chinese.
Instead, they look more like the Cro-Magnons (pi. 75). If these remains do
represent early Mongoloids, then most of the distinctive modern Mongoloid
                                                                41
features must have evolved during the last 25,000 years.             This is a far shorter
timescale than is generally believed, but it is not an impossible one.


Java and Australia
In Java, the descendants of"'Pithecanthropus' (Homo erectus) were probably still
living   on the banks of the Solo River 100,000 years ago, near present-day
Ngandong where a number of their skulls and a couple of leg bones have been
found. 42 These Javanese Ancients may have lived on in splendid isolation until
their world was disturbed by the arrival of early modern people about 60,000—




                                                                                             139
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND! THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



                               Zhoukoudian   •




     46 Possible migration routes to New Guinea and Australia at periods of lower sea level, when the Sunda
            and Sahul land shelves were exposed, and some important sites of early human occupation.
                            THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




47 A comparison of the robust Willandra Lakes braincase (IVLH-50, left) and the Ngandong
cranium XI from jfava.




50,000 years ago. But whether their genes could be found in                        modern
Australians is still uncertain.
  Australia was probably colonized by sea crossings about 55,000 years ago,
although the exact anatomical nature of these pioneers remains unknown. By
30,000 years ago, southeastern Australia was inhabited by peoples showing a
wide range of skeletal characteristics. 43 Some (such as those from Lake Mungo
- one of     the   Willandra     lakes   - and    Keilor)   were    as   gracile   as   the
contemporaneous Cro-Magnons of Europe, while others (such as the poorly
dated Willandra Lakes 50 [WLH 50] braincase and the later Kow Swamp
fossils) were distinctly more robust: pis. 77, 78.       These latter remains can be
interpreted in a variety of ways.        Some scholars, for instance, believe they
resemble the primitive Moderns of Africa and Asia whereas proponents of
multiregional evolution have pronounced them reminiscent of the Java and
Ngandong peoples, from whom they could have evolved.
  There are two main views about the causes of this skeletal variety. One,
supported by multiregionalists Alan Thorne and Milford Wolpoff, argues that
the variation reflects two separate evolutionary origins: the gracile line having
entered from mainland Asia via an eastern island-hopping route; and the
robusts representing descendants of people like those known from Ngandong
in Java, who entered via a western route. 44 The latter robust lineage would thus

have stretched back to Dubois' 'Pithecanthropus'.               The two     populations
gradually mixed to produce a highly variable population which, even today, has
been claimed to retain 'the mark of ancient Java': the flattening of the frontal
bones above the brows. The alternative view is that of researchers like Peter
Brown, who argues that a physically varied Australian population could have
evolved within Australia, as human populations diversified in behaviour and
local adaptations during the late Pleistocene. 45 The bulk of the genetic data for

Australia tends to support the idea of one basic origin for native Australians,
with a continuing input of some new genes from the north. But whether a
contribution from the Ancients of Java was added to that of the descendants of
the Out of Africa 2 pioneers is still unclear.




                                                                                              141
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



                One possibility that emerges from recent genetic, fossil and archaeological
              data is that there was in fact more than one modern human dispersal into the
              Far East. The early one could have been carried out by descendants of people
              like those at  Skhul and Qafzeh from western Asia. This early eastwards
              dispersal would have been at a Middle Palaeolithic technological level and
              retained more of the rather primitive features of the ancestral populations (for
              example relatively strong brows, big faces and big teeth). These could even
              have been added to by local evolution or by contact with the last archaic peoples
              of Southeast Asia during the dispersal into Australasia some 60,000-50,000
              years ago. Then there was a second dispersal with the spread of Upper
              Palaeolithic technologies in Asia after 50,000 years ago. These more Cro-
              Magnon-like populations are perhaps represented by fossils such as those from
              the Zhoukoudian Upper Cave in China and Lake Mungo in Australia. Such a
              model would account for the early physical variation in Australia and the
              supposed Ngandong-like features of       WLH     50. However, a fundamental
              problem with this and any multiple migration scenario into Australia is that
              there is no supporting evidence for the existence of separate migrations from
              the archaeological evidence (e.g. stone tool typologies).


              Having   briefly     reviewed the anatomical evidence from the Far East and
              Australia,     now time to see what light the behavioural (archaeological)
                           it is

              evidence can throw on the question of modern human origins, by first returning
              to the homeland of the Neanderthals.




142
                                   CHAPTER 7

             The Archaeology of the Ancients



In this chapter we will discuss the archaeology of the Neanderthals and their
contemporaries elsewhere in the Old World. As a record of material culture,
this archaeological evidence can provide an enormous amount of information

about the behaviour of the Ancients. We will use studies of the Neanderthals
(whose homelands - Europe and the Middle East - have been the focus of more
research than any other region in the Old World) as a framework with which to
build a wider picture of the Ancients in general. Our main aim is to establish the
similarities and differences in behaviour between the various populations of
Ancients, patterns which we can then contrast in Chapter 9 with those of the
Moderns, allowing us     finally   to   examine the arguments      for behavioural
continuity or replacement.
  The Middle Palaeolithic,      the era of the later Ancients including the
Neanderthals, probably started between 250,000 and 200,000 years ago. It was
followed in many parts of the world some 40,000 to 30,000 years ago by the
Upper Palaeolithic, a period marked by different techniques of stone working,
additions to the cultural inventory such as art and architecture, and evidence
for population expansion into      new lands and continents - all associated
                                                               1




exclusively as a cultural package with the Moderns.
  Over the lengthy duration of the Middle Palaeolithic - at least 10,000
generations - and across the vast regions of the world inhabited by the
Ancients, there were local differences in settlement, technology and the
organization of survival and social life. These differences are often subtle and
can only be detected through the detailed study of the techniques of flaking
stone, or butchering    and transporting animal carcasses. Studies of such
diversity within the uniformity2 of the archaeology of the Middle Palaeolithic
have replaced earlier views that either trends in technological progress could be
traced within this period 3 or alternatively that no change took place at all. 4
  Our enquiry into the archaeology of the Neanderthals (and the Ancients in
general) will begin with a review of the chronology of the Middle Palaeolithic
and its division from the Lower Palaeolithic. We will then turn to evidence for
the ever-increasing complexity of life, starting with the most readily available
data: that from the stone tools (introduced in Chapter 3). The typology of stone
tools has   been largely superseded by models of behaviour that concentrate
more on the 'biography' of the implement - how it was made, used,
resharpened, recycled, changed shape and finally thrown away. Rather than
classifying tools into types (such as points and scrapers) and quantifying the
proportions of each type in an excavated assemblage, the current practice is




                                                                                     143
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                               Stone Tool Typology of the Middle Palaeolithic


                    The shapes of stone tools are compared and classified in what is
                    known as typological analysis. Once a stone flake has been
                    knapped (see box pp. 56-57) it can either be used without further
                    modification or it can be retouched to change the shape and angle
                    of the working edge, or resharpened to obtain a fresh cutting edge
                    of   unmodified flint.     In   the process of retouch the flake                in effect
                    becomes the core, and through controlled flaking of the edge it can
                    be thinned or the edges shaped. These retouched flakes are often
                    described as tools and a representative selection is shown in
                    fig. 48. Distinctive Middle Palaeolithic flake tools include points,

                    scrapers and denticulates (notched pieces), and tanged tools.
                    Within these broad classes are a variety of forms and it is the
                    business of the typologist to order and classify them.
                       We owe much of our present thinking on Middle Palaeolithic
                    typology and technology to Francois Bordes (1919-1981), who
                    standardized procedures and introduced a quantitative approach
                    to the discipline. Bordes' study focused on the lithic material from
                    southwest France, consisting of 63 tool types. 5 He made compari-
                    sons between the tool assemblages from different levels - within
                    and between sites - on the basis of certain simple technological
                    indices. He also quantified the different methods of tool manufac-
                    ture, including the Levallois technique (see box on p. 149), and the
                    extent of blade production.
                      Bordes had expected to find enormous variation between the tool
                    types and techniques from different levels and sites, but he


                     48 Eight common types from Franqois Bordes              list   o/6j Middle Palaeolithic
                    stone tools. 3 Levallois point. 6 Mousterian flake point, ij Convex-concave side
                    scraper. 23 Transverse side scraper. 30 End scraper. 32 Burin (the arrows point
                           to the chisel-like facets)   .   38 Naturally backed knife. 43 Denticulate.




144
                                                             THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




discovered to his great surprise that the proportions of tools and
methods of manufacture within each assemblage almost always
fell into one of five groups:


1   La Quina: low in Levallois technique (<10%)
2 La Ferrassie: high in Levallois technique (14-30%)
3 Typical
4 Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition: A with hand axes; B without
    hand axes
5 Denticulate

  He concluded that these five types of assemblage were manufac-
tured by five different Neanderthal tribes, that coexisted but had
very little contact with each other. We will return to Bordes' theory
later.
   The names for many of the retouched flakes reflect their apparent
function. We can usually make no more than an intuitive guess as to
their function, although studies of the damage to edges from
utilization have shown that some of the pieces we call scrapers
were indeed most probably used for that task. 6
     Elsewhere in the Middle Palaeolithic world these same func-
tional descriptions are commonly used and, as might be expected,
added to. From the Sahara and Maghreb of northern Africa come
many examples of tanged tools known as Aterian points, some of
which at c.100,000 years old might represent the oldest examples of
deliberate  retouching to increase the effectiveness of hafted
               7
projectiles. The East African assemblages have pieces known as
sinew-frayers. 8 Large core tools have been found in Middle Stone
Age contexts in the Zaire basin. The Lupemban pick and lanceolate
are distinctive elements in what is termed the heavy duty
component of such assemblages. 9 In contrast the light duty
component is made up of scrapers and flake tools. 10


    4Q Middle Stone Age artifacts from Africa: a Lupemban pick; b lanceolate
                Lupemban pick; c sinew fray er; d Aterian point.




                                                                      100
                                                                     _i




                                                                                         H5
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              thus to concentrate on the raw materials used and the variety of edges produced
              by the many different techniques.
                From the artifact we will proceed to an examination of the Ancients' use of
              campsites. How were these organized? Is there any evidence for the systematic
              construction of hearths? What can we tell from the spatial patterning of stone
              and bone material? And what evidence is there for houses and shelters? At this
              level of analysis    we can also see the contribution of other animals, such as
              hyenas and bears, to the accumulation of animal bones in those locations used at
              other times by the Ancients.     We will also examine claims for the appearance of
              the   first   symbolic burials by the Neanderthals, and the arguments for the
              emergence of cultural behaviour e.g. the variation in the shape of stone tools to
              express cultural identity.
                From the campsite we will move out to the landscape. The Middle
              Palaeolithic world, like the      modern world, was highly varied in terms of
              habitats, food and natural resources (such as suitable stone for knapping), and
              we will study how these different landscapes were used by the different
              populations of Ancients. Obtaining raw materials and provisioning campsites
              with food are just two of the major aspects of Ancient life for which evidence
              has survived. The animal bones and stone tools which allow us to reconstruct
              such behaviour are pointers to that all-important human attribute: mobility.
              When we combine mobility with the ability to adjust group size to the season
              and the prevailing Pleistocene climate (Chapter 2) we have two of the most
              powerful means by which all hominids have survived. A third element, the
              forward planning through the storage of food and equipment, is also important,
              and a discussion of the evidence for all three - mobility, variations in group size
              and storage - will bring us closer to answering the question of how similar or
              not the survival behaviour of the Ancients was from that of the Moderns.
                 The final section of the chapter looks at the limits of the Ancients' world (fig.
              1). The Neanderthals were the first colonizers of certain habitats, such as the

              north European plain and the mountains of Central Asia. However, much of
              the Old World, and all of Australia and the Americas, remained uninhabited.
              By    considering the geographical extent of their territory, the range of
              environments they lived in, and the effect of climate on long-term occupation,
              we have another        line   of evidence for establishing similarities with and
              differences from ourselves.



              The chronology of the Middle Palaeolithic
              As we saw in Chapter 2, the middle Pleistocene was once described by Glyn
              Isaac as 'the muddle in the middle'. This unflattering term could have been
              applied with equal justification to the chronology of the Middle Palaeolithic
              (and its equivalent in Africa - the Middle Stone Age ). One reason for this was
                                                                     1
                                                                         '




              the lack of absolute dates for this period compared with the Lower Palaeolithic
              of East Africa (where Isaac worked) and the Upper Palaeolithic world-wide.
              But this is now changing and the chronological muddle is beginning to unravel.




146
                                                                      THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




  SO Some of the tools recovered from High Lodge in England. In apparent contradiction to
     traditional Palaeolithic chronologies, these implements are very Middle Palaeolithic in
appearance but have been dated to the Lower Palaeolithic, c. 500,000 years ago. a End scraper;
            b convergent scraper; c convex side scraper; d steep scraper or limace.



As it does so, however, we are discovering that some long cherished notions
about the ages of sites and stone tool industries will have to be rethought. 12
   The most fundamental issue to be challenged was the division between the
Lower and Middle Palaeolithic. As we discussed in Chapter 2, the Lower
Palaeolithic (best known in Europe through Acheulean industries) was
traditionally defined by the widespread occurrence of large bifacially worked
implements known as hand axes. These are usually of ovate or pointed form,
and scrapers are also common. The Middle Palaeolithic was characterized by
retouched (modified) tools such as scrapers, and hand axes in this period tended
to be rare. (The Mousterian is one such Middle Palaeolithic stone industry in
Europe, and     is   generally associated with the classic Neanderthals.)                The
concept, embodied in these definitions, of technological progress - whereby
tools gradually      became smaller and        finer   through time - has long been
abandoned. But few were expecting                it   to   be quite so comprehensively
overturned as it has been by recent work.


Chronological confusions in northwest Europe
The two English sites of High Lodge and Boxgrove in eastern and southern
England respectively were among the first to upset traditional beliefs.
Geological evidence suggests that these sites were two of the earliest in
England, dated according to the revised deep-sea chronology to about 500,000-
400,000 years old. Such antiquity implies they should belong to the Lower
Palaeolithic. But the flints found at High Lodge are very Middle Palaeolithic in
form.   They consist of well-struck flakes retouched into a limited range of
scraper and point forms (see figure above). And furthermore, hand axes are
missing. At Boxgrove the surprise is of a rather different nature. Hand axes were
found at this site, so there is no doubt about its traditional Lower Palaeolithic
credentials, but the axes are finely made ovates. Previously, such 'advanced'
artistry would have been assigned a much later date. 13

  Another site to upset traditional Palaeolithic chronologies was the site of
Pontnewydd Cave in north Wales. We saw in the box on pp. 58-59 that this site




                                                                                                  147
       THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                          has been dated to about 200,000 years ago. And yet the hand axes, cores and
                          flakes found at Pontnewydd are made on coarse-grained raw materials such as
                                                          14
                          rhyolites and volcanic tuffs.        The crude appearance of the hand axes would
                          once have suggested that they were much older than their actual date now
                          indicates.
                            At the opposite extreme is the open site of Swanscombe in the Thames
                          Valley. In the Barnfield pit site, a complex stratigraphy contains a series of river
                          loams and gravels with an interglacial age of      <:.   420,000— 360,000 years ago. 15
                          The lower loam contains no hand axes, but an assemblage of chopping tools and
                          thick irregular flakes. (This assemblage is known as Clactonian after similar

5/     A hard rock hand   material excavated from an old stream channel at the holiday resort of Clacton
axe,  made on a fine      on the east coast of England.) 16 There could hardly be any greater difference
siliceous tuff. About
                          than with the Acheulean industry from the upper loam, which contains many
200,000 years old,
and 12 cm tall, it mas    highly refined ovate hand axes. Both industries are probably much older than
excavated from            the coarse-looking Pontnewydd material.
Pontnewydd Cave.
                            The rich and complex site of La Cotte on Jersey (in the Channel Islands)
                          yielded similarly contradictory material to the traditional schemes. Dated to
                          about 238,000 years ago, 17 the site is dominated by flake tools such as side
                          scrapers. Hand axes are either rare or absent, while the Levallois technique (see
                          below) is common. Such artifactual evidence would firmly suggest that the site
                          belonged to the Middle Palaeolithic. Yet La Cotte is very similar in age to the
                          'Lower' Palaeolithic material from Pontnewydd, and it more closely resembles
                          the stone artifacts from High Lodge than the classic Lower Palaeolithic site of
                          Swanscombe, to which it is nearer in age.
                             These discoveries have made it very difficult to say exactly when the Middle
                          Palaeolithic began. We must realize that we are still trying to use a classification
                          that was devised some time ago with very different assumptions about how the
                          Pleistocene and the Palaeolithic were organized, assumptions determined in
                          large part by the limited techniques then available for dating sites of such
                          antiquity. Perhaps a term such as Earlier Palaeolithic - which combines the
                          Lower and Middle Palaeolithic of Europe prior to the Upper Palaeolithic,
                          40,000 years ago - should be adopted to avoid any further confusion that
                          absolute dates will bring (as they  become increasingly available) to the
                                                   18
                                               But for the sake of consistency with earlier discussions
                          traditional divisions.
                          in the book we shall continue to use the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic

                          terminology.
                            We will adopt the date of 250,000-200,000 years ago that many other
                          scholars now favour for the start of the Middle Palaeolithic. This date was
                          partly chosen because after this time hand axes appear to decline in numbers,
                          while a distinctive new method of preparing stone nodules to produce large
                          prepared flakes and blades - the Levallois technique (see box opposite) -
                          becomes much more common. The changeover was a slow process. Using the
                          long sequence from the granite headland site of La Cotte, Paul Callow has
                          argued that by 200,000 years ago the Middle Palaeolithic was firmly
                          established. During the 50,000 years over which this development took place,




       148
                                                       THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




     The Levallois and Disc Core Techniques of Flint Knapping


Levallois is a suburb of Paris, and it was here that archaeologists
first recognized the knapping technique   whereby the shape of the
flake is predetermined before it is struck off the core. Previously
tool makers had relied principally on chance to strike a well-suited
flake; the Levallois technique is considered by many to represent
an advance in tool technology because knappers now began to
control the shape of the flakes. The technique is often described as
an example of a prepared core approach to producing flakes and
occasionally blades (the latter defined as being twice as long as
they are wide). While one of the hallmarks of the later Upper
Palaeolithic, large blades made by the Levallois technique are also
found in the Middle Palaeolithic.
   The technique consisted of carefully preparing the nodule so that
one surface is domed. A striking platform (the surface to be struck)
is then prepared, on occasion elaborately. The flake/blade is then

struck off and the procedure is repeated until the core becomes too
small. Experiments by archaeologist Bruce Bradley have shown
                                                                         52 The Levallois
that from tabular blocks of flint measuring 4 x 15 cm, between 3 and     technique offlint-
8 flakes of predetermined dimensions could be struck. 19 Of course,      knapping: first the
many other flakes are removed at the same time. When exhausted,          nodule is prepared,
the core is sometimes described as a tortoise core on account of its     then a flake is struck.
shape. The scar of the last flake/blade removal is sometimes very
clear (fig. 52). Triangular points were commonly made using the
Levallois technique. These may well have been hafted (fig. 53).
   The Levallois technique is found widely throughout Europe, Asia
and Africa. Regional variants exist, such as the Victoria West cores             \ head
first identified in South Africa. These produced a large side struck
flake that would have been suitable for making hand axes or
                                                                                     -slot
cleavers. At the Wadi Haifa in Nubia, Anthony Marks describes a
special preparation technique involving bladelet removals to                         binding

detach predetermined flakes from pebble raw material (fig. 54). 20
   An alternative technique for producing flakes in the Middle
Palaeolithic involved the use of disc cores. These were not
prepared cores, but were instead rotated to obtain the correct           S3   A possible method
angles for flakes to be detached. The loss of predetermined flake        ofhafting a triangular
size was possibly compensated for by the greater number of               Levallois point.
serviceable flakes which could be knapped from an equivalent
lump of stone.
   The Levallois technique of core preparation is very different in
both approach and end product from the blade cores of the much
later Upper Palaeolithic. It is unlikely they indicate the same degree
of forward planning in tool manufacture.


54   Levallois versatility. Three
ways of preparing stone to make
different shaped blanks.
a Triangular point, b Transverse
Victoria West core, c Levallois
blade.




                                                                                                   149
   THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                      there are now absolute dates which             show a great deal of variability in the
                      composition of stone assemblages. It is impossible to see a clear sequence from
                      one tool industry to the next. Progress - with the implication of a relentless
                      drive to get better, faster - could not be a more inappropriate description.


                      The transition to the Middle Palaeolithic elsewhere
                      This variability is not confined to the British Isles. At the travertine site of
                      Ehringsdorf in eastern Germany, for instance, a date of about 225,000 years has
                      been assigned to an assemblage of stone tools that lacks both hand axes and
                                                    21
                      large bifacial tools. It contains instead a series of finely made, bifacially

                      worked points and scrapers. Before the site was given an absolute date, the
                      material was thought to be a likely ancestral industry - from the last interglacial
                      (i.e. c. 1 20,000     years ago) - for the later Mousterian. Now we can see that the
                      picture is    more complex. The stone industry from another travertine site,
                      Vertesszollos in Hungary, consists of small pebble tools and irregularly
                      retouched flakes. Such implements are usually considered 'crude' in compari-
                20
                      son with the Acheulean hand axes and prepared core techniques such as
                      Levallois. Consequently Vertesszollos is usually spoken of as a classic Lower
55 Chopping tools     Palaeolithic pebble tool site, and it was originally thought to be at least 350,000
from Tata, Hungary.
                      years old. 22        However, recent uranium-series dates indicate that the thick
                      travertines were laid down over a period of 50,000 years, between 210,000 and
                      160,000 years ago - in other words, much later than the 'refined' flake tool
                      assemblages from High Lodge and Ehringsdorf and the ovate and pointed hand
                      axe assemblages of sites such as Boxgrove and Swanscombe. (This appears to
                      conflict with some of the mammal remains, which indicate an earlier date.)
                         On the eastern edge of the Neanderthals' world (map pp. 10-11), in
                      Tadzhikistan in Central Asia, are the sites of Karatau and Lakhuti. Thermo-
                      luminescence dating of simple flakes and pebble tools from loesses at the two
                      sites   has   yielded         dates   of 194,000-210,000 and   150,000-130,000 years
                                       23
                      respectively. And to the south, in sub-Saharan Africa, a number of so-called
                      late Acheulean sites (meaning that large hand axes were still common) have

                      been dated e.g.         to     260,000 years ago at Isimila and 230,000 years ago   at

                      Kapthurin in northern Kenya. Desmond Clark has argued that the transition to
                      the Middle Palaeolithic/Middle Stone Age took place about 200,000 years ago
                      in Africa, since the site of Gademotta in the Ethiopian Lakes section of the East

                      African rift valley has a Middle Stone Age assemblage below a volcanic tuff
                      dated to about 235,000 years ago. 24


                      Diversity in the Middle Palaeolithic
                      The earliest Middle Palaeolithic that we have just reviewed was therefore a
                      period of transition. Within the period 250,000-200,000 years ago we find
                      considerable variety in the composition and technology of assemblages. This
                      variety   may arise partly from the differences in raw materials that were
                      available.    But      this    cannot be the whole explanation, since the Levallois
                      technique       is    employed on the coarse rocks of Pontnewydd Cave and




    150
                                                                    THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



throughout the volcanic areas of Africa, as well as in areas where fine-grained
flints and cherts are a readily available raw material.

  The diversity in the proportions of the different types of stone tools found in
Middle Palaeolithic assemblages, however, is based on only a very limited
range of tool types themselves. Hand axes, flakes, Levallois flakes and blades,
side scrapers, points, cores and pebble/chopping tools make up the bulk of the
artifactual material. Once established, the pattern of assemblage types appears
to continue throughout the period 200,000 to 130,000 years ago.
  The later Middle Palaeolithic in Europe lasts from about 130,000 to 35,000
years ago. It therefore spans the last interglacial and both climatic phases of the
early glacial (see table p. 45)           and coincides with the period of the classic
Neanderthals in southwest Europe and the Middle East. There is some overlap
with the earliest       Upper Palaeolithic industries, such as the Aurignacian
(Chapters 8 and 9), which appear by 40,000 years ago.                The period is also
marked by additional variety in the lithic material. Recent TL dating at
important French cave sites such as the Grotte Vaufrey, Combe Grenal, Le
Moustier and Pech de TAze has shown that these classic Mousterian assem-
blages belong in this later phase of the Middle Palaeolithic (Appendix i). 2S




        56 Tools from the later
        Middle Palaeolithic, a
        Micoquian knife or hand axe.
           b Alousterian of Acheulean
           Tradition knife or hand axe.


                                                                       100
                                                               mm


  The 100,000 years of the later Middle Palaeolithic also saw the introduction
of distinctively shaped stone tools whose chronological position                is   better
understood than the previous                       These include the small
                                            150,000 years.
Micoquian hand axes and knives and the classic triangular hand axes/knives
found in the later Middle Palaeolithic of England and France. In France, the
latter occur in assemblages known as the Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition

(MAT), so named because of the reappearance in a Middle Palaeolithic
(Mousterian) industry of large, hand axe-like implements similar to those that
characterize the Acheulean. Such assemblages can be dated to the early part of
the last glaciation after 75,000 years ago. The Micoquian, named after level 6
from the cave of La Micoque in southwest France, is widely used to describe a
variety of assemblages of this age in other parts of Europe.                 A number of
regional     variations    have    been recognized,      for   example the distinctive
asymmetrical knives from Bockstein Cave in southern Germany or the Pradnik
'knives' from Poland.




                                                                                                151
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                      New Research on Stone Tools: a Focus on Edges


                               The traditional typologies of the European Middle Palaeolithic treat
                               each tool type as a distinct artifact that the flint knapper had set out
                               to make. However, this takes no account of the retouching process.
                               Harold Dibble has recently shown that differences between tools
                               are in fact more accurately a measure of the continuous process of
                                                                       26
                               utilization and resharpening (fig. 57).    As the scraper is reduced in
                               size the retouch tends to get heavier and the piece passes,
                               typologically, from a straight-edged, single-sided scraper to a
                               convex form, and finally becomes a transverse scraper. The
                               biography of the implement is therefore determined by a host of
                               factors governing the intensity with which it was used and at what
      57 Drawing of a          stage it was thrown away.
      scraper, with the           As a result, the edges of a tool are now becoming more important
      previous stages of its   for understanding stone technology than its overall shape. In a
      production shown. The    study of Middle Palaeolithic collections from Spain, Michael Barton
      implement changes        concludes that irrespective of tool shape there were only two basic
      shape as a result of
                               edges. 27 The first are those found on notches and denticulates (fig.
      continuous retouch,
                               48). They are one-offs, expediently made and used, comparable to
      from a single-edged
                               the rare examples of Middle Palaeolithic burins and piercers. The
      side scraper to a
      transverse scraper.      second set of edges are found on points and scrapers they vary
                                                                                           ;




                               continuously in size and shape as a result of the nature and
                               intensity of their use.
                                 Instances of recycling raw materials have been noted by
                               scholars previously, 28 but only recently have they assumed
                               significance. For example, specialized resharpening is known from
                               La Cotte in Jersey where over 2,000 sharpening flakes have been
                               found. 29 Of these only one could be refitted back to the tool from
                               which it had been struck (fig. 58). 30 Recycled flakes are most
                               common in those assemblages at La Cotte where flint sources had
                               become rare due to such factors as rising sea levels.
                                 The link between a reduction technique and changes in the
                               environment at La Cotte warns us against a stolid view of Middle
                               Palaeolithic knappers - bound by tradition and limited in their
                               choices by low intellects. The idea that they held a mental template,


      58   A refitted
      sharpening flake
      from the Middle
      Palaeolithic site of
      La Cotte, Jersey.




152
                                                             THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




       a sort of knapper's blueprint, in their head when making tools is too
       simplistic. The range of tool types may have been limited and the
       proportions between assemblages repetitive, but the sequence of
       reduction was dynamic, related to a complicated web of decisions
       about survival. Furthermore, the demonstration by Lawrence
       Keeley and other experimental edge-wear specialists, that many
       'tools' were just sharp-edged, unmodified flakes has further
       questioned the significance of typological analysis for understand-
       ing behaviour.




Contradictions to traditional European chronologies
The Middle East and southern Africa, both occupied by the Ancients, have
provided quite a different picture of Middle Palaeolithic stone technology and
typologies. As we saw in Chapter 5, the Middle East has yielded evidence which
contradicts the long-established European association between hominid fossils
and types of stone tools. For many years European archaeologists believed that
Middle Palaeolithic stone tools would be made by Neanderthals and Upper
Palaeolithic implements by Cro-Magnon, modern people. That this theory can
no longer be supported is indicated by the discovery of a Neanderthal skeleton
at Kebara Cave in Israel and the anatomically modern skulls and skeletons from

the much older Qafzeh cave. Both sites, irrespective of their fossils, have
Middle Palaeolithic tools. 31
  A second contradiction to the European chronology of the Palaeolithic
concerns what tools were made when. In Europe the technological divisions
created for the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic had always assumed a measure
of advance,   if   not progress, from a flake-based to a blade-based stone
technology. Thus, Upper Palaeolithic blades were slender and lightweight,
often far   more than twice as long as they were wide           (the criterion for
distinguishing blades from flakes). In Europe, the division between the two
periods could be demonstrated stratigraphically by the many sites, such as La
Ferrassie or El Castillo, at which      Middle   Palaeolithic assemblages were
overlain by   Upper Palaeolithic industries. The Middle/Upper Palaeolithic
division was therefore a chronological statement about which technological and
typological system was older.
  But outside Europe this chronological distinction has never been so clear cut.
Ever since Dorothy Garrod's excavations at Tabun cave in Mount Carmel and
Alfred Rust's investigations of the Yabrud rockshelter in Syria it has been
apparent that the stone technology of the Upper Palaeolithic appears and
disappears in the long stratigraphies of these caves, well before the genuine
Upper Palaeolithic is established. 32 These assemblages are known as Amudian,
after the Wadi Amud where the same sequence has been found. Thus, blades

and some other Upper Palaeolithic tool types appear in the archaeological




                                                                                         153
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                  Sg Pre- Upper Palaeolithic tools from north and south Africa.
                                  a Awl burin (north Africa), b Notched blade (north Africa).
                                       c,d Backed blades, probably hafted (south Africa).




              record at these          sites,   only to be followed by thick deposits of Middle
              Palaeolithic,       Mousterian assemblages, often with heavy use of the Levallois
              technique. A similar pattern occurred at the Libyan cave of Haua Fteah, while
              at a corresponding latitude (but 7,600              km to the south) the huge deposits in the
              caves at Klasies River Mouth also contain a rich Upper Palaeolithic blade
              technology stratified within             a    long Middle Stone Age sequence. 33 This
              assemblage, known as the Howiesons Poort, was not only dominated by blades
              made on stone imported some distance from the site, but also contained
              geometric microliths, including triangles and trapezes which some believe were
              most probably hafted as barbs in arrows. 34 These microliths are dated to
              between 50,000 and 70,000 years ago. The contrast between this assemblage
              and the flake technologies of the under- and over-lying Middle Stone Age is
              very marked indeed.
                   Avraham Ronen has              called    the   various   early   appearances of Upper
              Palaeolithic technology the            pre-Upper Palaeolithic, or PUP for short. The
              dating of these assemblages              is   not always definite, but most of them are
              probably of a similar age to the PUP at Klasies River Mouth. Which type of
              hominid or hominids made them is uncertain (Chapter 8). But what is clear is
              that the stone-working techniques of the Upper Palaeolithic, far from sweeping
              the board as they did in            Europe after 40,000 years ago, elsewhere met an
              indifferent or short-lived response when first used at an earlier time. Of course,
              this discovery really tells us            most about the way we believe             Palaeolithic
              technology should change i.e. from crude to fine, with the assumption that what
              is   closest   in    time to the present must be an advance.                  The widespread
              phenomenon of the              PUP provides us with an alternative to traditional
              classification of the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic. Another alternative is to
              consider the variation between assemblages of stone tools not so much in the
              broad terms of Middle and Upper Palaeolithic technology and typology, but
              instead in relation to their function (see box on p. 152).



              CAMPSITES
              The main characteristic of the Ancients' campsites is a negative one: the lack of
              features. Until well into the later Middle Palaeolithic, some 60,000 years ago,




154
                                                                   THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                Settlement Types



       A model of Middle Palaeolithic settlement was first put forward 20
       years ago by Lewis and Sally Binford. 35 They argued that the
       starting point for understanding the limited variability in        assem-
       blages of Mousterian stone tools, as revealed by Bordes (pp. 144-
       45), must be to view them as components in a regional system. The
       model which they proposed was very simple. Settlements were
       divided into two main types: base camps, where food was prepared
       and consumed, and tools manufactured and repaired; and work
       camps, where food and raw materials were obtained. They argued
       for the mobility of Middle Palaeolithic people in the landscape since
       food resources were not evenly distributed, and would vary not only
       in the long term as climate changed but also seasonally. This
       mobility produced a third type of camp, the overnight stop.
          The originality of their approach lay in testing this model by
       analysing the combination of tool types in Mousterian assem-
       blages. Their study is known as a functional approach since they
       assigned functions to the tools before carrying out a computer-
       assisted factor analysis on the material from a small number of
                                             36
       sites in Europe and the Middle East. Their analysis suggested that
       base camps could be identified with two of Bordes' five Mousterian
       groups whereas those assemblages dominated by denticulate
       tools and side scrapers (fig. 48) were the result of activities carried
       out at work camps. 37




there is an absence of such obvious campsite items as structured hearths (rather
than just a concentration of ash), post holes for tents, pits for storage, or
trenches from house construction.
  In   northern   Europe there        are   a   number of      sites   with   exceptional
preservation. These include Biache-St-Vaast in northeast France, Maastricht-
Belvedere in the Netherlands, and the English              sites   of Boxgrove, Hoxne,
Clacton and the loams at Swanscombe. But what is striking about all these sites
which have bones and stone tools in primary contexts, is how unstructured they
appear.   Nowhere do we        find    built    hearths,   pits,   post   holes   or   even
arrangements of stones and bones as windbreaks. Poor preservation cannot be
blamed, because these sites are better preserved than many from the much later
Bronze i\ge or Roman periods. Yet campsites stubbornly refuse to be found. As
Catherine Farizy has concluded, the uniform nature of remains at these sites
suggests that only a limited range of activities was carried out. 38 She believes
that behaviour at this time did not link different functions to different places.
  'Site' therefore   becomes an inappropriate term to describe such unstruc-
tured locations. They are pieces of the landscape which happen to have had a




                                                                                               155
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                       60 Some of the earliest known constructed hearths, dating from the end of
                   the Middle Palaeolithic,have recently been excavated at Vilas Ruivas in Portugal.




              higher than average number of flints and bones deposited upon them. The only
              patterns we can safely interpret are the activities of butchering animals and
              stone knapping, where we can, on occasion, see where the person knelt from the
              spaces in the waste flakes they left behind. In the case of the latter activity, it
              was very much a 15-minute culture that lasted in Europe for at least half a
              million years.
                While substantial hearths are absent, thick ash deposits, burnt bone and
              charcoal are very common in both open and cave sites. x\sh deposits are found
              throughout the Klasies sequence in South Africa where many layers with ash
              lenses occur, and similar evidence for burning is known from La Cotte in the
              Channel Islands and Vertesszollos in Hungary. Archaeologist Ofer Bar-Yosef
              makes the same observation for the Levantine sites. 39 Middle Palaeolithic
              people it seems had fire but they did not build elaborate hearths. The most
              complex hearths consisted of small scoops in the cave floor.
                 The first examples of features and structures at the Ancients' campsites
              come towards the end of the Middle Palaeolithic about 60,000 years ago. A
              well-built hearth has been excavated by Luis Raposo at Vilas Ruivas in
              Portugal. 40 It is associated with a late Mousterian tool assemblage. Hearths of
              similar age are known from the multi-level sites of Molodova on the Dnestr




156
                                                                    THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                          (7              ^o
                                                     V




          6/   y4 Mousterian level at Molodova yielded piles of mammoth bones that
           are thought once to have formed part of a very early hut or windbreak.




River in Russia, although they are not stone-built. 41 However, their frequency
in a single occupation horizon and their novel association with                 windbreaks
made from piles of mammoth bones is worth noting.
  The artificial structures at Molodova are the earliest yet documented which
have stood the test of critical scrutiny. There have been many claims for older
huts and cabins but none are convincing. Perhaps the best                    known is the
supposed series of huts with internal hearths that Henry de Lumley excavated
                               42
at Terra Amata in Nice.             Work on refitting the flints by Paola Villa has shown
that the site was more disturbed than previously thought. 43 Inspection of the
few published plans reveals an all too familiar low-density scatter of stone and
animal bone with localized patches of burning. These are most definitely not a
series of beach huts as so commonly speculated. 44

  There are other ways to examine the fireside differences in the behaviour of
the Ancients. At the Grotte Vaufrey in France, Jan Simek has investigated the
patterns revealed by the meticulous excavations undertaken by Jean-Philippe
Rigaud. 45 A lens 8 cm thick found in level VIII contains a rich Mousterian
assemblage, dated to more than 132,000 years ago. The artifacts and bones
form clusters around a rock fall. The lack of hearths results in very little formal
structure and no focus for activity. The contents of these clusters of material are




                                                                                                157
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              very repetitive (unlike those in the Upper Palaeolithic levels at the nearby site
              of Le Flageolet), and may point to the repeated occupation of the shelter by a
              small group. Simek interprets the Grotte Vaufrey patterns according to Lewis
              Binford's theory that Middle Palaeolithic foragers frequently moved their
              residential base camps,   whereas Upper Palaeolithic peoples operated out of
              permanently occupied home bases and only used rockshelters as special
              purpose sites to exploit strategic resources (see box on p. 155).
                Two other issues about Middle Palaeolithic campsites need to be discussed.
              These are the much debated topics of art and burial, and the extent to which
              they were practised by the Ancients.



              Burials

              The     so-calledMiddle Palaeolithic burials only occurred consistently in
              Europe, the Middle East and Central Asia. 46 Just one has been unambiguously
              identified in Africa: the child burial at Border Cave, which may be as old as
              80,000 years. None come from open sites. Strictly speaking it is more accurate
              to refer to these finds as complete or nearly complete skeletons rather than
                                                                                       47
              burials, however closely they seem to foreshadow current practice.            What is
              most interesting about the distribution of these finds is their concentration in
              western Europe and the Middle East (fig. 1). The greatest number occur in
              southwest France, with a notable outlier at Spy in Belgium. The only fairly
              complete skeleton ever to come from central Europe was the first from the
              Feldhofer Cave in the Neander Valley, found as we have seen by workmen in
              1856. Elsewhere in central and eastern Europe the Neanderthal material is
              fragmentary - bits of skull and limb bones. At Kiik-Koba in the Crimea, two
              bodies - an adult male and infant - were found during excavations between
              1924 and 1926. Let us now conduct a brief survey of the evidence for burials.
                In the Middle East fairly complete bodies have been excavated at Kebara,
              Tabun, and Amud, and modern humans at Qafzeh and Skhul. In Iraq, the cave
              site   of Shanidar has produced a series of important Neanderthal remains,
              including the one referred to as the flower burial (fig. 62). 48 The pollen grains in
              the sediments surrounding the body were interpreted as garlands of flowers
              strewn across the corpse. But not everyone believes this interpretation,
              preferring instead the    more prosaic explanation that the grains percolated
              through the sediments or were deposited by animal burrowing. 49
                 Further east at Teshik Tash, horn cores of the Siberian mountain goat were
              found with their points apparently driven into the ground around the partial
              skeleton of a child. Whether this was to protect the corpse from scavengers or
              represented some rite is still open to question. Indeed, wild goat is the most
              abundant species in the faunal remains from the site and the association
              between the skeleton and the horn cores may be entirely fortuitous.
                 None of the European burials are directly associated with red ochre, 50
              although some bodies in the Middle East have the occasional lump. 51 This
              pigment (an iron oxide or hematite) occurs naturally, and is undoubtedly




158
                                                                                                     .




                                                                        THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




62 Scholars are currently locked in debate as to whether these fairly complete skeletons represent
deliberate burials: a Kebara 2 Neanderthal; b Shanidar 4 Neanderthal; c Qafzeh 11
anatomically modern human.




associated with Upper Palaeolithic burials, for example the 'Red Lady' from
                                                                                                52
Paviland Cave in south Wales. It is thought to have had a symbolic function.
   Many of the Neanderthal bodies are in a crouched position, sometimes with
the head pillowed on an arm. Whether they were arranged or just died in their
sleep and were quickly covered over is difficult to determine. At La Ferrassie in
France there was no clear evidence for grave pits, although an adult male and
female were found head to head. 53 To make matters more difficult, many of
these finds were excavated a long time ago, when the accurate recording of
important details such as the sedimentological evidence for the presence of a
grave pit was not carried out.           The recent find at Saint-Cesaire shows no
evidence for a pit. The pit containing the Chapelle-aux-Saints body, on the
other hand, was very clear to the excavator, Abbe Bouyssonie, in 1908. Here
was an intentional burial, but whether it was a burial in the modern sense or
more akin to rubbish disposal is the point at issue. With other finds we have to
be more careful. Sometimes, and most notably at Le Moustier, a body was
buried and re-excavated several times to provide visiting dignitaries with the
                       54
thrill of discovery.        These stories, while rare, make it difficult to accept claims
for such grave goods as intentionally placed stone tools or joints of meat. The

goods are just as probably part of the general stone and bone assemblages rather
than have any special significance. However, the lower jaw of a wild boar was
apparently clasped in the hands of the anatomically modern burial of Skhul V,
while a fallow deer skull with antlers turned up in the hands ofthe Qafzeh 1 1 child
   Despite all the difficulties of interpretation, finding quite complete bodies is
of great interest, especially since they are very early in northern latitudes
(Chapter 3). But if they are not burials in the modern sense, what else could
account for the sudden increase in complete or near complete bodies? Clive
Gamble has recently pointed out that as a general rule, complete Neanderthal
skeletons have been found only in those regions where carnivores did not make




                                                                                                         159
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              great use of caves, indicated by the very small number of carnivore bones
              recovered from the sites. 55 Such sites are particularly common in Israel and
              southwest France (fig.    i),   for instance   Le Moustier, Tabun, Shanidar and
              Teshik Tash. In those areas of central and eastern Europe where finds of
              Neanderthals are very fragmentary (as at Ganovce in Czechoslovakia and
              Krapina and Vindija in Croatia), there are abundant carnivore remains either at
              the sites or in the general area. The presence in winter of bears digging their
              hibernation 'beds' in the cave floor and, in spring, of wolves and hyenas using
              the caves and rockshelters as dens, must have provided only a slim chance for
              the survival of complete bodies, irrespective of any protection - symbolic or
              practical - in the form of pits or a 'fence' of horns.
                   We argue therefore that Neanderthal burials appear when and where they do
              because of local shifts in carnivore behaviour away from using caves and
              rockshelters, and not as a consequence of the birth of symbolic behaviour. 56 It
              is noteworthy, for instance, that not one Neanderthal burial/complete body
              comes from an open site anywhere in Europe. Yet such open-site burials are
              common in the Upper Palaeolithic, when deep grave pits were dug (Chapter 9).
              It is also worth noting that in central Europe, where no Neanderthal cave

              burials have yet been found, there are open site burials dating to the Upper
              Palaeolithic, for instance at    Dolni Vestonice in Czechoslovakia. Carnivores
              were present during both periods          in   this   region.   We conclude that the
              preservation of complete bodies in open sites during the Upper Palaeolithic
              indicates a deliberate custom, closer in concept to what we regard as a burial
              than the Neanderthal practice, which was probably more akin simply to corpse
              disposal; in the latter instance, complete skeletons only survived in exceptional
              circumstances.



              Middle Palaeolithic art and symbolic expression
              Similar caution has to be exercised over the claims for art and ritual objects
              dating from the Middle Palaeolithic. Such items include a diverse collection of
              scratched and polished bones, as well as pierced objects (see table opposite).
              Among the latter are some reindeer phalanges (toe bones) which have a neat
              hole in them. E. Lartet and H. Christy interpreted these bones as whistles as
              long ago as 1864, but it has since been pointed out many times that such
              perforations are almost certainly due to gnawing by carnivores.
                   Other items in the list are not easily explained away by butchery marks or
              accidental happenings. But whatever caused them, they remain a very small
              and heterogeneous sample. 58 This fact alone makes it difficult to assess claims
              such as those by Alexander Marshack that the pieces with zigzag scratches from
              Pech de l'Aze and Bacho Kiro (pi. 92) prefigure an entire code of symbolic
                                                                                     59
              motifs that became widespread later in the Upper Palaeolithic.              Some of the
              Middle Palaeolithic marks may well have been made intentionally, but they
              most probably lacked any symbolic rationale. We believe they should be
              compared in this respect to the repeated shapes of hand axes, scrapers and




160
                                                                     THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS


Site                   Object                           Industry              Age (years ago)
La Quma                Drilled fox tooth                Mousterian
La Quina               Pierced reindeer phalanx         Mousterian
La Ferrassie           Bone with fine incised           Mousterian
                       parallel lines
Bacho Kiro             Bone with engraved zigzags       Mousterian            > 43,000
Tata                   Mammoth molar lamellar,          Mousterian            116,000-78,000
                       modified
Pech de I'Aze          Rib fragment with incised        Acheulean             123,000-103,000
                       lines
Pech de I'Aze          Pierced bone fragment            Mousterian
Cueva Morin            Bone fragment with incised       Mousterian
                       lines
Sclayn                 Bear tooth with grooves          Middle Palaeolithic
Berekhat Ram           ?? Figurine                      Acheulean             > 230,000
Kebara                 Incised bones                    Mousterian
Klasies River Mouth    Bone with parallel grooves       Middle Stone Age
Klasies River Mouth    Ribs with serrated edges         Middle Stone Age


6j Examples of early symbolism? Listed here are Middle Palaeolithic artifacts with apparently
               deliberate marking; probable ages, when available, are given.




Levallois points. There is no reason to suppose that such limited, repetitious
forms were determined by symbolic codes; instead, we argue, they probably
simply resulted from imitation, as one Ancient learnt the art of stone knapping
by copying another. We will return to this important debate about the birth of
symbolic behaviour in Chapter 9, where we will discuss early language.



LANDSCAPE
A key issue in our understanding of the Ancients during the Middle
Palaeolithic regards the extent of their organizational complexity. How did
they make a living in the prevailing open environments? Were they as complex
as modern fisher-hunter-gatherers or did they have very different strategies of
survival? Archaeologists often believe that if they can resolve the question of
how subsistence was obtained, they will have a clearer understanding of the
general behavioural capabilities of the Ancients.
     At present, however, there            is   no consensus about the subsistence of
Neanderthals. The results can be used to support arguments for either hunting
or scavenging, or - as we suggest here - a combination of both strategies. What
we would like to know is how the Neanderthals varied in complexity and degree
of organization and planning from Upper Palaeolithic foragers. This question
is   currently the focus of much research, particularly with the analysis of
associated animal bones (see box overleaf). Nevertheless, one point on which
most scholars do agree is that, in the northern world of the Neanderthals, the
exploitation of plant foods       formed only a minor component in subsistence
(Chapter 2).
     Before we discuss such complex issues, it is first of all necessary to define the
slippery     terms,   hunting and scavenging. For our purposes, hunting                        is




                                                                                                    161
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                               Some Examples of 'Hunting' by the Ancients


                    Archaeologists all too frequently discuss hunting simply as an
                    exercise in killing. What is more, the social prestige today
                    associated with hunting often means that Palaeolithic hunting is
                    regarded as evidence for more complex behaviour than scaveng-
                    ing. We believe, however, that it is far more useful to look at both
                    strategies in terms of planning, mobility, group size and storage, for
                    analysis of the organization involved in provisioning campsites can
                    often reveal much more information than a straightforward quanti-
                    tative study of animal bones. Indeed, we will show that many
                    cherished notions about specialist and big-game hunting fail to
                    stand up to a broader approach to the evidence. 60
                       Specialist hunting undoubtedly existed in the Middle Palaeo-
                    lithic. At the Channel Island site of La Cotte, for instance, two piles of

                    bones containing mammoth and rhino were found preserved
                    beneath a rock overhang in Middle Palaeolithic levels dated to
                    180,000 years ago (fig. 64). Katherine Scott interpreted the bones as
                    the result of hunting drives across the granite headland. And at
                    Combe Grenal in France, Francois Prat and -more recently- Philip
                    Chase examined in detail the changes in animal species during the

         <3==>




                    64   Two piles of bones were excavated beneath the shelter of a rock overhang at
                    La Cotte; they are thought to be the result of a hunting drive. Here, in level 3,
                    the remains included parts of at least seven mammoths and two woolly rhinos.




162
                                                         THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                 61
last interglacial/glacial cycle.    Here, levels dating to the temperate
phase contained large numbers of red deer, whereas the dominant
species in later strata, about 75,000 years ago, was the reindeer.
Chase interprets these data as evidence for specialist hunting
governed by climatic controls on animal numbers.
   But the presence of a single dominant species does not always
signify the pursuit of specialist hunting. For example, the Hortus
cave in southern France (excavated by Henry de Lumley) was the
site of a narrow fissure containing animal bones, fragmentary
Neanderthal remains and a Mousterian industry. The animal bones
were dominated by ibex, and the location of the site beneath a large
                                                                       62
cliff has led scholars to interpret it as a specialist hunting camp.

But the cave fissure was also used by lynxes and leopards, and
later as a hibernation den by cave bear. The large quantities of ibex
bones might therefore have been deposited there by the big cats
rather than by specialist Neanderthal hunters.
   Similar doubts have been voiced about the open-air Mousterian
                                                        63
site of Erd in Hungary, excavated by Gabori-Csank.         Here the rich
animal fauna was dominated by cave bear, leading researchers to
propose that the site was geared in particular to hunting these
huge, dangerous omnivores. However, the presence of bones from
new-born bear cubs strongly suggests that it was also a hibernation
site (possibly an earth or snow bank den), meaning that the Middle
Palaeolithic artifacts may have related to entirely different animals
in the deposits.
  Much more convincing as specialist hunting sites are the open-
air sites recently discovered in southwest France. At one of these,
La Borde in the Lot valley, the remains of Bos primigenius (aurochs
or primitive cattle)  make up 93 per cent of the animal bones.
Females and young were hunted at different times throughout the
year. On the other hand, carnivores were very rare, causing the
excavators to infer well-planned and systematic hunting on the part
of the Neanderthals, who were killing these animals during a
temperate phase, possibly 120,000 years ago. 64
   So what about big-game hunting? While there are innumerable
artists' reconstructions of Neanderthals throwing rocks at mam-
moths and killing adult male bison and woolly rhinos with flimsy-
looking spears and gnarled clubs, we believe there is scant
evidence that this was either a regular occurrence or the likely
method of killing such large animals. The long sequences spanned
by sites in the Middle East contain evidence that medium- and
small-sized animals formed the mainstay of hunting strategies from
the Middle through to the end of the Upper Palaeolithic. As Ofer Bar-
Yosef has summarized, the presence at some sites of large animals
such as Bos primigenius and megafauna like rhino and hippo is
probably the result of scavenging. 65 Opportunities for such activi-
ties must have been common, but were not always seized upon due
to constraints of time, labour and - conversely - the availability of
hunting staples such as red deer, horse, gazelle and fallow deer.




                                                                                     163
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                  ^ Such was the case at Combe Grenal, where the Neanderthals
                     focused their attention on the smaller herd animals such as horse,
                     red deer and reindeer.
                        As the table on p. 53 indicates, small animals were available at all
                     sites; species of large prey varied across the Neanderthal world. It
                     is clear that, wherever possible, small animals were preferred;

                     hunting of megafauna was not the norm. This conclusion is
                     supported by the massive bone structure and repeated stress
                     fractures on several Neanderthal skeletons (Chapter 4), which
                     suggests that these hominids were involved in close-quarter killing
                     of medium to small herd species, rather than a showdown with a
                     4-ton mammoth. 66
                        In summary, evidence for the subsistence strategies of the
                     Neanderthals is still far from clear. Animals of various sizes were
                     being killed and some of these, as at La Borde, were hunted in a
                     manner that implies a degree of planning and organization rather
                     than a chance encounter. In other instances, however, such
                     specialist hunting cannot as yet be disentangled from the activities
                     of other animals - such as wolves and hyenas - that accumulate
                     bones.




              concerned not so much with        killing   animals as with planning. Neither      is

              scavenging just about picking up bits of dead animals. Both hunting and
              scavenging involve making decisions about where to move in the landscape in
              order to stand the best chance of intercepting game, dead or alive. The planning
              involves thinking ahead in terms of making and using technology.                 Most
              importantly, hunting in northern latitudes has to take into account those lean
              seasons of the year when prey migrate elsewhere. An alternative to using the
              natural stores from animal mortalities as they occur during the winter is to
              make a living from stores built up artificially after successful hunts at other
              times of the year. This would mean intensive processing, as well as the
              provision of storage facilities for caches of meat. In organizational terms, the
              end result would be greater security and the opportunity to occupy areas where
              natural mortalities alone were not sufficiently plentiful to sustain seasonal
              foraging for frozen meat. Such planning, if the Ancients possessed it, would
              qualify as complex behaviour.
                It is reasonable to expect that forward planning will be reflected as     much in
              the record of settlement location as in the types and ages of the hunted animals
              and the parts which were brought back to feeding sites. The degree of planning
              depth has been isolated by Lewis Binford as the key to understanding the
                                                                                   67
              different archaeological records of the Ancients and Moderns.
                A fully planned hunting strategy depends on far-flung social contacts. These
              can serve several purposes. Networks of obligation and partnerships are
              established by exchanging goods and gifts, objects which then represent a form




164
                                                            THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



of social storage against future hardships. During local food shortages, for
example, foraging groups can obtain vital resources from the more fertile
neighbouring territories occupied by kin or exchange partners. Contacts can
also provide other commodities, such as marriage partners. These networks of
exchange, therefore, are part of a much wider survival strategy essential in a
harsh environment. In fact, people are often bound together by widespread
systems of alliance which extend        well   beyond the geographical      limits

maintained simply through visiting and personal contact.



A regional example of Neanderthal subsistence
How can we analyse or quantify the subsistence strategies of scavenging and
hunting? In particular, can we take advantage of the presence of carnivores in
the same sites to learn something about Neanderthal behaviour?
  We believe that bones alone (see box above) will not give us the whole
picture; a wider, landscape   approach to the question needs to be adopted
instead. The region is the appropriate unit for examining subsistence since it
was at this level that resources were distributed, and the Neanderthals - as well
as other Ancients   - had to match their group size and mobility to the
predictability, abundance and seasonal availability of food.
  The example we have chosen will also demonstrate the advantages of a
regional, landscape approach to that crucial question of the depth of planning
displayed by the Ancients. The study, by Mary Stiner and Steven Kuhn, is of
two Neanderthal cave sites on the Tyhhrenian coast of west-central Italy:
Guattari Cave at Monte Circeo and the Grotta di Sant'Agostino near Gaeta. 68
Stiner and Kuhn demonstrate that it is possible to reconstruct patterns of both
scavenging and hunting at these sites. But their study also emphasizes that, in
the end, such definitions are less important for understanding Neanderthal
behaviour than are the insights (afforded by the transportation and selection of
animal carcasses and stone materials) into the degree of planning exercised by
these hominids as they provisioned their cave sites.
  Stiner conducted an examination of animal bones, and found very different
patterns at the two sites. The upper levels at Guattari (levels i and 2) contained
many gnawed animal bones and a head and hooves assemblage characteristic of
animal scavengers, clearly indicating that the cave had been a hyena den, rarely
visited by humans. In the lower levels 4 and 5, on the other hand, there were
fewer gnaw marks on the bones and not many hyena bones, suggesting that at
this time the cave was little used as a den. But the assemblage is still dominated

by heads, which leads Stiner to argue that when it came to choosing which parts
of the carcass to transport to the cave from a scavenging location, the Guattari
Neanderthals behaved in a similar manner to hyenas.          The Sant'Agostino
bones, however, indicate that a very different strategy was being followed by
the Neanderthals.    Here, red and fallow deer were hunted rather than
scavenged, and most of the carcass was transported back to the cave. Cut marks
on the bones outnumber carnivore tooth scratches.




                                                                                        165
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                The different patterns of faunal remains at the sites suggest that these
              Neanderthals varied the strategies they used to obtain food. They were neither
              dedicated specialist hunters nor specialist scavengers, neither opportunists nor
              careful strategic planners. Rather, they pursued a goal of subsistence security
              and met this with a range of behavioural solutions. They may not have used
              storage to reduce the risk of subsistence failure, but the fact that they moved
              around the landscape, making different decisions about what food to move
              where and at what time of the year, does suggest that the Neanderthals were
              able to plan to a certain degree.
                The faunal evidence can also provide clues as to the detailed behaviour of the
              Neanderthals. For instance, Stiner studied the question of why head and
              hooves assemblages should exist at all, since these parts of the carcass are
              usually poor in meat. Moreover, heads with horns and antlers are very bulky
              and heavy to carry any distance. 69 Stiner deduced that the Neanderthals were
              under great nutritional stress, scavenging those parts of the carcass which still
              contained vital fat reserves. During the lean winter seasons, animals in poor
              condition use up the fat reserves from their body and marrow. These are first
              depleted from the legs and trunk, while the head retains its fat resources longer
              in order to support brain functions. Even an animal that has died of starvation
              will have some remnant fat supplies in its skull. This is probably the resource

              the Neanderthals were after.




                                             Northern Foragers


                     Let us consider the problems faced by northern foragers. Here the
                     main survival problem facing the Ancients was how to get through
                     the winter since they did not create stores of food. One solution
                     might have been as follows.
                       The large animal communities of glacial northern Europe
                     (Chapter 2) would have experienced a high rate of natural attrition.
                     Starvation, old age, accidents and carnivore kills would have
                     annually resulted in a heavy cull of species ranging in size from
                     woolly mammoths to saiga antelope. One survival strategy for the
                     Ancients would have been foraging for and scavenging parts of
                     large carcasses from the open tundras. When the natural mortality
                     of these animals coincided with cold conditions, the carcasses
                     would freeze. The frozen mammoths, horses, bison and many other
                     species preserved for many millennia in the permafrost of Siberia
                     and the Yukon show that the meat is edible, if you hold your nose,
                     once the carcasses have melted. Obviously the Neanderthals
                     would have had to have found them long before they were frozen
                     into the land surface, and no doubt most of the time the hominids
                     would only find carcasses that had already been partially devoured
                     by carnivores. The pay-off for searching for such resources during
                     the lean months of a long glacial winter (when the herds of horse,




1   66
                                                                 THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                     REGIONAL
                   SETTLEMENT                             ARCHAEOLOGY




                                                             High        Low
       /         Local group area                 Scatters    M M
        •   '•   Scavenging location              Caves
        *        Summer hunting location                   Density of artifacts
       -n-       Cave/shelter
       ,-'**
                 Zone of winter mortalities


65   The concentration of artifacts in some caves and river valleys in the cold
northern world of the Neanderthals seems to be directly related to the location of
food. This suggests that stone tools (represented in the archaeological record
either as scatters across the landscape or as denser patches in caves and foraging
locations) were used and discarded most frequently at the spots where food was
regularly to be found. Compare this with the pattern at southern sites (fig. 6g).



red deer and reindeer had migrated far away to their winter grazing
grounds) would have been that these frozen carcasses were
uncontested. Even hyenas with their massive bone-crushing jaws
could not get at them once they were frozen. The control of fire by
humans would allow them to defrost and use such resources.
   This might explain why caves were used over and again for brief
visits. They were not necessarily home bases, but rather some-
where to build a fire, raise the temperature and defrost such
resources; well-built hearths, lined with stones, were not a
requirement for such thawing. This may account for the repeated
use of La Cotte and many other cave and rockshelter sites in the
glacial northern latitudes. These fixed points in the landscape were
simply places to transport food for further processing, as Stiner has
also suggested following her study of animal heads brought back to
the Grotta Guattari. To succeed, the strategy required that sufficient
quantities of megafauna consistently died in some parts of the
landscape. Finding them depended on nothing more than mobile
search parties and the ability to bring the right number of people
together to match the type and amount of food that had been found.
Using these natural stores might well have provided an important
way of getting through the winter, only returning to close-quarter
hunting when the all-important herds appeared again in the spring.
Rather than referring to such behaviour as scavenging, with has
connotations of merely ekeing out an existence, we prefer to see it
as foraging for fixed resources where searching skills were
paramount. 70 An alternative strategy, possibly adopted by southern
foragers, is discussed on pp. 172-73.




                                                                                             167
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                Since it takes some time to break open animal heads and extract the food
              within, they were transported back to a refuge such as Guattari Cave. These
              terminal fat reserves would have had a special significance for pregnant females
              and children, particularly during the winter when often all that was available
              would have been natural animal mortalities. We have seen no evidence that the
              Ancients adopted any alternative, more complex solution to the problem of
              seasonal shortages such as the creation of stores of meat, marrow and grease
              from well-planned hunting (when animals would have been intercepted at
              known locations). 71 Their campsites are devoid of the elementary features
              associated with survival strategies of this kind.
                The faunal assemblages at the sites of Guattari and Sant'Agostino were
              consistently related either to scavenging or hunting. This suggests that during
              the Middle Palaeolithic, the two subsistence strategies took place in different
              parts of the landscape. Further analysis may reveal that the different foraging
              patterns were determined by gender. For instance, female groups may have
              been responsible for scavenging, while the males obtained most of their food by
              hunting; both sexes would have been responsible for feeding themselves. This,
              however, is still highly speculative.
                Whatever the explanation        for   such patterns, the contrast with faunal
              material from the later Upper Palaeolithic sites is very marked. For it is quite
              clear that the Moderns, presumably the males, were provisioning their camps
              with both hunted and scavenged material. The caves may have been occupied
              throughout a season or for much shorter periods of time, but they were
              certainly a form of 'home base'. In the Middle Palaeolithic, however, such base
              camps did not exist; the group, perhaps split into males and females, fed itself
              and moved on. The short, expedient nature of Middle Palaeolithic occupation
              probably explains why Guattari and Sant'Agostino only contain evidence for
              either scavenging or hunting.
                Simply   to   classify   the Neanderthals as either hunters or scavengers,
              however, would be to miss much potential information about their regional
              organization. Conditions throughout the Ancients' world were diverse, and
              they were met with a variety of solutions (some of which are considered in the
              boxes on pp. 167 and 172-73). It is clear that the Neanderthals could plan, but
              only with limited depth and provision for the future.       They relied on the
              abundance of prey, dead or alive, rather than clever technology to increase their
              chances of success against less predictable resources. The intricate matching of
              personnel to resources in the highly seasonal habitats of glacial Europe seems to
              have been beyond their organizational abilities; their modern successors, on the
              other hand, sent small work parties to specific points in the landscape in order
              to take advantage of less important foods as they briefly became available. Such
              an elaborate planning system would work only if the returns from separate
              foraging parties were stored and shared at a future date.      We can find no
              evidence that either the Neanderthals or the other Ancients were capable of
              such complex behaviour.




168
                                                                THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



Landscapes and raw materials

Materials can often be identified to particular sources, so it is possible to trace
the distances over which objects have been transported. The analysis of raw
materials and the manufacture of stone tools can therefore provide another way
of investigating how the Neanderthals and other Ancients used the landscape.
We will illustrate our discussion, again, with reference to the Italian study. But
let us first examine in general terms the relations between artifacts and their raw

materials.



The Dibble and Rolland model of tool manufacture
Archaeologists Harold Dibble and Nicholas Rolland have recently constructed
a simple model to predict the effect of distance from source on the manufacture

and use of stone tools. 72 They decided to take a fresh look at the five Mousterian
assemblages from southwest France first examined by Francois Bordes (see box
pp. 144-45). It will be recalled that Bordes believed the differences between the
Middle     Palaeolithic   assemblages   to   result   from   five   different   cultural
traditions.   Dibble and Rolland, however, suggest that raw material played a
greater role.
   When raw material is close at hand, they argue, artifacts are less well
finished. Tools are made when they are needed and soon thrown away; this is
known as an expedient technology. Where some effort has been expended in
obtaining suitable raw material from a distance, on the other hand, the extra
'cost' is reflected in the larger numbers of retouched or recycled implements: a

so-called curated technology. With this model in mind, let us now return to
Stephen Kuhn's analysis of the Italian Middle Palaeolithic.



Stone tools and land use in Italy
The lithic assemblages from Guattari and Sant'Agostino are part of a well-
known regional industry known as the Pontinian. The closest source for large
flints   was at least 50 km (31 miles) from the two caves, so their Middle
Palaeolithic inhabitants tended to rely on the locally available small, rolled flint
pebbles. Access to these was somewhat easier at Guattari so - in accordance
with the Dibble/Rolland model - one would expect this to be reflected in the
extent to which the cores were worked into implements. Kuhn found that this
was indeed the case, with a higher frequency of casually worked cores at this site
than at Sant'Agostino. Unexpectedly, however, the availability of the flint
pebbles seemed to have no influence on the intensity with which tools were
retouched or further modified. Indeed, the number of retouched tools                  is

actually lower at Sant'Agostino, where raw material was not present on site.
Kuhn's results are presented in the table overleaf. 73
  Kuhn deduced that the frequency with which tools were retouched must
have been more closely related to the sorts of activities for which they were
being used than the distance of a site from the closest source of flint. The




                                                                                            169
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS


                                               Guattari               Guattari            Sant'Agostino
                                               levels 1 & 2           levels 4 & 5        all   levels

               Age (years ago)                 c.57,000               c.76,000            43,000-55,000

               Duration of Neanderthal         Very short             Probably short      Relatively long
               occupations

               Animal parts brought            Heads and hooves       Heads               All   body parts
               back to the cave

               Neanderthal subsistence         Unknown                Scavenging          Hunting and some
                                                                                          scavenging
               Season of human use             Unknown                Unknown             Winter

               Carnivore use                   Hyena den              Slight              Wolf den in spring

               Reduction of tools              Moderate/light         Heavy               Light

               Frequency of retouch            Moderate               High                Low
               on tools

               Frequency of transported        Moderate               Low                 Low
               artifacts


                           66 Patterns of hunting and artifact use at Guattari and Sant'Agostino: a
                                             summary of the Stiner-Kuhn studies.



              different patterns of tool wear can therefore tell us something about the role of a
              site within a larger system of land use.

                As we have seen, Sant'Agostino yielded the remains of fairly complete
              animal carcasses which strongly suggest that its inhabitants were involved in
              hunting. Evidence also indicates that the cave was occupied for relatively long
              periods, meaning that raw materials could have been stockpiled at the site, thus
              counteracting the influence of absolute distance to the source. Kuhn surmised,
              therefore, that the Neanderthals at Sant'Agostino made relatively short sorties
              from the cave, during which they could obtain raw materials at relatively little
              cost, thus accounting for the infrequent and light retouch of tools at the site.
              The scarcity of faunal material at Guattari 4 and 5, on the other hand, suggests
              that its Neanderthal occupants would have depended less on hunted material
              and more on gathered resources such as plants and shellfish. The manufacture
              of wooden implements needed to collect such foods often involved heavy-duty
              stone tools which required frequent resharpening.                  The high level of tool
              modification at Guattari might therefore relate to the subsistence strategy of
              gathering and scavenging adopted by the Neanderthals living there. Such a
              conclusion is supported by the nature of the tools themselves, which are thick
              and large in comparison to the thin, delicate flakes found at Sant'Agostino. The
              latter would have beenmuch more suitable for processing softer animal meat.
                The Neanderthals, like any group of mobile foragers, would have been faced
              with many competing claims as to how best to organize their limited labour and
              locational tactics to achieve subsistence security. Perhaps, for instance, they
              would sometimes make do with the raw materials to hand because other factors
              - such as the presence of prey and the size of the human group in need of
              feeding - were more pressing. The Italian study has shown us that patterns of
              tool use can be an invaluable source of information about the complexity of




170
                                                                          THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



behaviour at the regional level. 74 We will now take a look at the organization of
groups in the landscape.


Peoples in the landscape

Having discussed the different patterns of movement across the landscape by
various Ancients, and the variety of ways in which they obtained subsistence
and raw materials, we can finally dispense with a model that long dominated the
interpretation of Neanderthals: Francois Bordes' theory of the five distinct,
sedentary Neanderthal tribes. 75 According to this view, the five tribes lasted for
many millennia. They did not evolve culturally so much as mark time, pushing
into and being pushed out of the most desirable rockshelters of the region. He
believed that these populations had very low regional densities, but that they
were also very sedentary, with each group using one cave at a time. For Bordes
this was the hallmark of the Middle Palaeolithic world: 'A                man must often have
lived and died without meeting anyone of another culture, although he knew
                                                                                          76
"that there are men living beyond the river who make hand axes".'
   But sitting in one spot, not talking to the neighbours and just exploiting the
immediate countryside would be a sure route to extinction. To survive as a
hunter or scavenger in temperate latitudes, especially under glacial conditions,
depends to a large extent on mobility. This is the means by which people
constantly adjusted to the available resources. Mobility in search of food also
brings benefits in terms of acquiring information about other resources such as


6y A provocative comparison, by
Lewis Binford, of the size of
territories used by modern foragers
 (above) and Middle Palaeolithic
foragers in the Dordogne. Francois
Hordes' idea that the Neanderthal
tribes who lived in the caves led
                                                                                   AeEA ^EAIOEhJTIA.LI-'r'
separated, isolated lives from their   /ZEAJOE.r'J-riAl^ KfOVEA 0*r                V4EO SY- t-llf^E.
                                       o*j£. G/wt Sa*j ^aw/ly                      f-JvKIAM I UT FAW/i./£4
near neighbours seems very unlikely    OVEK EL.EVE hJ MOKITMS                      DU/S/ hj<& A n^E
when mobility must have been the key                                               Yeab    /=>E&

to survival.

                                                                                               Le Mou-Sti e K


                                                                                                             /°£C« OE L-A-Z,E




                                                      AO&I   VAUF-fSE.                                       -(jBEMALs
                                                                         Dordogne         Area
                                                                                  France
                                         Comparative                             Reqiokjal           6cale6
                                                                         5CALE     in   Mile*
                                                 io      o     10   zo     .so




                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                    7I
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                 Southern Foragers at Klasies River Mouth


                    The caves at Kiasies River Mouth, perched on the northern edge of
                    the now submerged continental shelf of southern Africa, were
                    occupied for at least 60,000 years during the late Middle Palaeo-
                    lithic. The climate during this time changed from interglacial to

                    early glacial conditions, but the abundant faunal remains exca-
                    vated at the site do not reflect these environmental shifts. Nor are
                    the changes in the lithic material - from the Middle Stone Age to
                    pre-Upper Palaeolithic (the Howieson's Poort) and back - reflected
                    in any significant differences in the animal bones. (This is
                    particularly interesting if, as John Wymer has suggested, the
                    geometric microliths in the Howieson's Poort were being tipped
                    with poison and hafted in arrows. 77 )
                       The rich faunal assemblages yielded over 10,000 bones, which
                    were then identified to particular animal species. In a detailed study
                    of these remains, Richard Klein commented on the different uses
                    which were made of animals belonging to five different size
                    classes. 78 Animals in class IV, weighing between 600 and 900 kg (0.6
                    and 0.9 tons), were numerically dominant. Among these, the eland
                    and Cape buffalo were represented by only a very selective number
                    of anatomical elements, mainly heads and feet. This was in marked
                    contrast to the smaller species - such as steenbok, bushbuck and
                    blue antelope - whose complete carcasses had been carried back
                    to the cave. Klein interpreted these differences as the outcome of
                    field butchery decisions. Large animals were butchered into
                    manageable parcels and heavy limb bones thrown away. Once
                    butchered, the meat was piled inside the skin and dragged home.
                    Such a practice is often referred to as the 'schlepp' or drag effect.
                    Leaving the foot bones in the skin provided a set of handles,
                    although this does not adequately explain why so many teeth and
                    horn cores from skulls are found at the sites. 79 Small animals, on the
                    other hand, were easily transportable to the cave intact.
                       Klein studied the numerous animal teeth found at the site in order
                    to examine the different strategies used for hunting small and large
                    species. The ages of the prey can be reconstructed by analysing the
                    eruption of their teeth, i.e. from the height of the tooth above the jaw
                    line. In this way a profile of the population is built up. The eland
                    remains came mainly from prime-aged adults: good evidence,


                    68 Grazing animals of all sizes
                    have been found at the Klasies
                    River Mouth. Their remains have
                    been interpreted in different ways by
                    Richard Klein and Lewis Binford.




172
                                                                 THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




               REGIONAL                                 ARCHAEOLOGY
             SETTLEMENT




                                                 High              Low
         / Local group area                             m m
         •   Feeding location                     Density of artifacts

             Stone source

             Protected sleeping site



6g   The archaeology offoraging by the Ancients in warmer southern latitudes,
based on reconstructions of subsistence at Klasies River Mouth. Territories were
smaller than in the Neanderthals northern world (fig. 65), while plant
foods provided more of the diet. Here the densest concentrations of artifacts
are to be found outside the foraging areas, at water holes and sleeping sites.


according to Klein, that herds were driven either into traps or over
cliffs where the healthy adults (which would otherwise have been
difficult to catch) were killed. On the other hand, the age profile of
the Cape buffalo, one of the largest animals in the collection, is very
different. These animals are mostly represented by very young and
old individuals, a pattern best explained in terms of scavenging
parts of animals that have died from natural causes or were killed
by carnivores.
   Lewis Binford agrees with Klein that the smaller prey, below 40
kg (88 lb) in weight, were probably hunted opportunistically. But he
has argued that all the large animals, including eland, were
scavenged. 80 His view is that the bones brought back to the caves
were not evidence of the schlepp effect, but instead still had some
meat on them or contained marrow resources. The bones, he
suggests, had been picked up from carcasses already ravaged by
hyenas, Cape hunting dogs, leopards and lions. But Binford's
theory fails to take account ofthe large number of prime adulteland.
We therefore suggest that a mix between the hunting and foraging
scenarios of Klein and Binford is much more likely.




Mir-" -*'
                       5




                                                                                             173
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              firewood, raw materials and people. Among modern hunters, such information
              is   the key to survival in very harsh climates. For example, a modern group of
              Inuit families would annually travel great distances, equivalent say to the area
              covered by the classic Middle Palaeolithic sites of the Perigord (fig. 67).
                   The study of raw materials can again help us to build up a picture of the
              mobility of the Ancients. Recent research by Wil Roebroeks, Jan Kolen and
              Eelco Rensink has reconstructed the patterns of raw material usage in the
              earlier Middle Palaeolithic of Europe. 81 The greatest distance traced over
              which raw materials were transported during this time, some 200,000 years ago,
              is about 100 km (62 miles), but this was an exception. In the later Middle

              Palaeolithic (130,000-40,000 years ago) the situation is different, and
              occasionally distances of up to 300 km (186 miles) have been recorded.
              Distances were generally greater in central and eastern Europe because
              conditions during the last glacial cycle were harsher, increasing the size of
              territories over which groups had to forage and hunt.                 There may even have
              been some rudimentary alliance networks between groups and individuals, as
              described earlier. But these social networks were still very limited in scale and
              complexity, and most of the time raw materials for making stone tools only
              travelled local distances.
                   A detailed study by Jean-Michel Geneste of raw materials during the Middle
              Palaeolithic in Aquitaine, southwest France, also emphasizes the local nature of
              the use of lithic resources. 82 The table below indicates that raw materials in
              Aquitaine were rarely obtained from more than 80 km (50 miles) away. 83


                                                                                   Percentage of
                                                               Percentage of         flint used
                                             Radius from         flint on a           i.e.   made
                                               site (km)             site             into tools

                               Local              >5                55-98                    1-5

                               Region            5-20               2-20                10-20

                               Exotic           30-80                <5                74-100


                         jo   Table to show the relation between the availability of raw material and
                                               the extent to which it was used.



              Local is thus truly local, the majority of flint coming from within a 5-km radius
              of a site. The further away flint was obtained, the more likely it was to be
              introduced to the site as a retouched tool. 84 Some equipment - such as spears
              tipped with points, flakes, or a reduced piece with a retouched edge - was
              obviously being carried around the landscape, presumably in anticipation of
              future use.     So their behaviour was not completely expedient; not, in other
              words, always a case of find the material, knap it, use it, throw it away all in the
              same place. But the question remains, to what extent does it compare with the
              planning of the Moderns in the Upper Palaeolithic?
                   The   Neanderthals, and Ancients generally, appear to have used the
              landscape in different ways from the Moderns. As we shall see in Chapter 9, not
              only is there evidence after 40,000 years ago for structured campsites with




174
                                                                          THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




7/   Raw material routes for stone in the later Middle Palaeolithic (top) and the early Upper
Palaeolithic (above).   The dashed line indicates the distances over which shells and other objects
were obtained. Clearly raw materials travelled much greater distances during the Upper
Palaeolithic.




storage pits and base          camps (which are properly called villages), but the
distance over which raw materials - now including shells and lumps of fossil
resin - were transported was much greater.                  Moreover, the emphasis in the
Upper Palaeolithic on small, standardized, light, stone blade and bladelet
elements adds hafting and composite tools to the assessment of planning from
the archaeological evidence. Such components are only regularly found in the
few pre-Upper Palaeolithic assemblages of the Middle Palaeolithic. These, as
we have seen, are geographically restricted to parts of the Middle East, north




                                                                                                      175
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              and southern Africa. They were not part of the cultural package, including art,
              ornament and display items generally, that betokens the widespread social
              networks universal after 40,000 years ago (Chapter 9).


              EXPANSION INTO NEW HABITATS
              Hominids first left Africa, in the Out of Africa 1 dispersal, more than a million
              years ago. By half a million years ago they had reached as far north as the British
              Isles; but the next 450,000 years saw little additional expansion, especially

              when we consider that the continents of the Americas and Australia were
                                       Yet some authorities have made the case for the
              accessible for colonization.
              origins during this period of truly cultural behaviour, linked to geographical
              expansion. Why?
                 Gerhard Bosinski points out that it was only during the late Middle
              Palaeolithic (after 130,000 years ago) that the north European plain was settled
              for the first time. In his opinion, this geographical expansion marks a great
              threshold in    human development. 85 Before this period, he argues, artifact
              assemblages varied according to situation, such as the function of a tool or the
              availabilty of raw materials. But the Middle Palaeolithic saw the appearance of
              Formengruppe, distinct lithic industries which suggest that cultural traditions
              had replaced environmental factors               in   the   determination of stone tool
              manufacture.
                 A similar conclusion was reached by Desmond Clark in his discussions of
              East Africa in particular and the Middle Stone Age of Africa in general. 86 He
              cites the   expansion of Middle Stone Age populations into a variety of new
              habitats in Africa, ranging from areas today covered by desert to those of high
              rainfall.   According to Clark, the colonization of new territories indicates an
              advance from the previous Early Stone Age Palaeolithic, and signals the
              beginning of regional cultural identities and biological differentiation. 87
                 The Ancients also expanded into the steppes of Central Asia, at the
              easternmost limits of the Neanderthal world. This                  is   evident from the
              widespread finds of Mousterian artifacts over formerly uninhabited territory,
              and also from the occupation (e.g. at Teshik Tash) of extremely rugged terrain
              at altitudes of up to 1,500   m   (c.   5,000 ft). Further northwest too, on the steppes
              of the Ukraine, it is noticeable that the earliest occupation is associated with
              Middle Palaeolithic artifacts along the major rivers of the Dnepr and Dnestr.
              This is probably an extension of the pattern of new settlement observed by
              Bosinski for the North European Plain. The dating of these sites is placed in the
              last glaciation, about 60,000 years ago.

                 But for all the apparent geographical gains made by the Neanderthals and
              Ancients, we would argue that their world remained limited. We find nothing
              to support the Bosinski/Clark theory that the Middle Palaeolithic was a great
              cultural watershed.     We believe that, compared with the expansion of the
              Moderns after 40,000 years ago, the Ancients were doing nothing more than
              opportunistically filling up some of the less attractive landscapes in their world.




176
                                                          THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



Among these would be the areas of the eastern Sahara which are hyperarid
today but were wetter 120,000 years ago, and so offered the opportunity for
settlement. These opportunities were often brief. Such expansions by the
Ancients, moreover, were very closely determined by the climate: populations
ebbed and flowed from marginal habitats as the climatic cycles ran their course.
While such fluctuations had probably occurred ever since Homo erectus left
Africa over 1 million years ago, the significance of settlement gains made after
200,000 years ago is that new territories (previously unsettled even under
optimum climates) were now used for the first time. But this did not lead to the
dramatic and rapid expansion of population into new continents. So, far from
being released from the shackles of environment by major developments in
culture, Neanderthal populations - like all the Ancients - were still governed
by changes in climate and resources. As a result the hand axes, scrapers and
points    which they used    strike   us not as cultural items signifying and
symbolizing group membership, but rather as the items which assisted the
hominids in their survival over many hundreds of thousands of years. In this
respect, the stone tools   were versions of the unmodified pebbles that wild
chimps have been observed using to crack open nuts in the forests of West
Africa.   We can see no convincing evidence from the campsites of the Ancients,
from their use of resources or the varieties of stone tool assemblages they
chipped, or from the limited geographical expansion they undertook, that the
change from being a hominid assisted by tools (an Ancient) to a hominid with
behaviour organized symbolically (a Modern) took place during the Middle
Palaeolithic. This great shift in behaviour, we believe, only came later, after

40,000 years ago (Chapter 9).




                                                                                      177
      J2   Map to show the key sites and the maximum extent of the ice sheets (dark tint ) in Upper Palaeolithic Europe.




178
                                      CHAPTER 8

                  The Fate of the Neanderthals



As we have seen, we can trace early modern humans in Africa and the Middle
East from at least 100,000 to 90,000 years ago, but if they then expanded further
north and west from Israel, their trail goes cold. This may be partly due to the
lack of informative sites excavated over much of Asia, but even those that are
known have produced evidence only of Neanderthal fossils as far east as Teshik
Tash. For areas as large as the Indian subcontinent we have virtually no data at
all.   It is not until about 40,000 years ago that evidence appears of people other

than Neanderthals in western Eurasia. At about the same time, and probably in
association with this, we find the first true European Upper Palaeolithic
industry,     which  known as the Aurignacian after the cave in France
                      is

(Aurignac) where it was initially identified. Not only does the Aurignacian have
a preponderance of tools made on long slender blades, but bone, antler and
ivory artifacts, jewellery, ornaments and art in the form of figurines and
engravings are also now found within well-organized campsites.



The earliest Moderns in Europe: the anthropological evidence
The site of Staroselye in the Crimea has yielded part of the skeleton and skull of
an infant aged about two. The child looks modern in both skull and skeleton,
but the associated artifacts are Middle Palaeolithic. It is not clear whether this
skeleton is a later intrusion into the Middle Palaeolithic levels, or whether it is a
Ukrainian equivalent of the association between Moderns and the Middle
Palaeolithic observed at Skhul and Qafzeh. This might then represent an early
Modern in western Eurasia. Other possible early Moderns are represented by a
few jaw and tooth fragments associated with the earliest Upper Palaeolithic
level at the Bulgarian cave of Bacho Kiro, and radiocarbon dated to more than

43,000 years ago. The shadowy nature of the earliest European Moderns is
manifested at the Spanish site of Cueva Morin, where two pseudomorphs (soil
traces of buried bodies) dated at about 34,000 years indicate a very                 non-
Neanderthal stature of over 1.8        m (about 6   ft)   for the vanished bodies.
   We can put more substantial flesh on the early Moderns in Europe from
about 34,000 years ago.    1
                               A frontal bone from Velika Pecina in Croatia has a high
forehead, small brows and a radiocarbon date from an overlying artifact level of
more than 34,000 years, while a similarly fragmentary but more robust frontal
bone from Hahnofersand, Germany, has been directly dated at about 33,000
radiocarbon years. The latter specimen is robust enough to have led some
scholars to suggest that it is from a transitional Neanderthal-Modern




                                                                                            179
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS




                    73  One of the first illustrations
                    (from Lartet and Christy 1875)
                    of the early modern skull known as
                    the 'Old Man' of Cro-Magnon
                    found in a rockshelter in the
                    Dordogne in 1868.



              individual, either an evolutionary intermediate or an actual hybrid.       But it
              seems more likely that it is just from a very strongly built early Modern.
              Unfortunately,     it   was recovered from a river bed without any associated
              materials.
                Similar claims of affinities with the Neanderthals have been made for the
              large sample of human fossils from the cave of Mladec in Czechoslovakia. Here,
              the remains of several males, females and a child show considerable variation in
              size and robusticity.  The adult assumed males have very strong but modern
              brow ridges, whereas the females have little or no brow development. The
              skulls are relatively long and some have bulging occipital bones at the rear,
              which are reminiscent of those of some Neanderthals. Yet the preserved facial
              parts indicate a flat face with forward placed cheek bones, contrasting strongly
              with the Neanderthals (pi. 71). Probably dating from about 33,000-30,000
              years ago, these Mladec people were undoubtedly primitive compared with
              modern Europeans, but primitive does not necessarily mean especially like, or
              derived from, Neanderthals. The strong build of the Mladec skulls,
              particularly the males, is matched today in the most rugged individuals from
              areas as far from Europe as South America and Australia, where there is no
              suggestion of a Neanderthal connection. Of a similar age (about 32,000 years),
              the cranial vault from Stetten (Vogelherd) in Germany is almost a twin of one of
              the female Mladec skulls.
                Various fragmentary early modern humans were found with Aurignacian
              stone tools in western Europe, some of which are convincingly modern. The
              most famous specimens are the remains found in the Cro-Magnon rockshelter
              in the Dordogne in 1868 (pi. 69). These remains, as we have already discussed,

              gave their name to the whole European Upper Palaeolithic race, and probably
              come from the later Aurignacian about 30,000 years ago. The 'old man' of Cro-
              Magnon (Cro-Magnon 1) is often contrasted with the 'old man' of La Chapelle
              (who we saw was probably no more than 40 years old at death) and the contrast
              is startling (pi. 80). Although their dissimilarity is somewhat exaggerated by the

              tooth loss in their jaws (which shortens the Cro-Magnon's face even more) the
              differences are real enough, particularly in the high forehead, small brows, low
              square orbits, wide, short and flat face, small nose and prominent but hollowed
              cheek bones of the Cro-Magnon. These differences extend through the rest of
              the skeleton, which is better represented at Cro-Magnon than at Mladec. The




180
                                                                           THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



Cro-Magnon skeletons, especially of male individuals, were strongly built, but
they were    tall   with long lower parts to the arms and          legs.   These features
contrast with the apparently cold-adapted physique of the Neanderthals
(Chapter 4) and would suggest, if we did not know that these individuals came
from Europe, that they were in fact from tropical or subtropical areas. This
unusual physique (seemingly so inappropriate for the cold conditions then
prevailing in Europe) was apparently inherited by successive generations of
Cro-Magnons until the peak of the last glaciation, which suggests an impressive
ability to cope culturally with the worst effects of the cold. However, from the

glacial   maximum (about 18,000 years ago) onwards, later Cro-Magnons seem
to have developed the sort of physique one would expect for their temperate or
cold habitats, and in this sense they became more like the Neanderthals as well
as   modern Europeans. It has been suggested by Milford Wolpoff that the
differences in limb proportions between the Neanderthals                    and the Cro-
Magnons occurred as the latter took up longer distance walking and running,
following changes in hunting patterns or the development of wider social
networks. But this does not explain why such a long-legged physique should
have appeared as long ago as 1.6 million years in the skeleton of the West
Turkana boy, or in the 100,000-year-old skeletons from Skhul and Qafzeh,
which were found in a Middle Palaeolithic context. We believe instead that
climatic adaptation was responsible for these differences in physique.
   By 26,000 years ago complex burials, often accompanied by red ochre
powder, are known throughout western and eastern Europe, from Paviland
cave in Wales to Dolni Vestonice and Pfedmosti in Czechoslovakia. In one of
the most tragic scientific losses of the Second World War, the entire collection
of over 25 skeletons from Pfedmosti was lost in an arson attack, along with some
of the Mladec remains.



The last Neanderthals
After 30,000 years ago there is no longer any trace of the Neanderthals, but
archaeology provides some further clues as to their fate.              It is   now widely
believed    that    a   regional   industry in southwest France and            Spain,   the
Chatelperronian, was   made by Neanderthals, based on the fossil remains
associated with it at Saint-Cesaire and Arcy-Renne in France. The Saint-
Cesaire find, made in 1979, has been especially important. Now dated to about
36,000 years ago by       TL techniques,   it consists   of the partial skeleton and skull
of an undoubted Neanderthal, in the higher of two Chatelperronian levels at
the rockshelter. 2 The best evidence of the industry comes from the site of Saint-
Cesaire. The Chatelperronian has some Middle Palaeolithic features, but many
of the tools are made on well-struck blades. The characteristic Chatelperronian
point or knife has a curved back with blunting retouch (similar to the blade of a
modern penknife), a shape very reminiscent of the naturally backed knives of
the Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition B          (MAT B). In the latter, the blunted
edge was formed by the cortex or outer layer of the flint. These similarities led




                                                                                                    181
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



              Francois Bordes to trace the lithic ancestry of the Chatelperronian back to the
              MATB.
                 There are similar indications of the last Neanderthals elsewhere in Europe
              taking up new technological ways, for instance the Uluzzian industry in Italy
              and the Szeletian complex in eastern Europe. Both of these are similar in age
              and form to the Chatelperronian, and consist of a mixture of Middle and Upper
              Palaeolithic techniques and types. Unfortunately, only very fragmentary fossil
              remains are associated with either of these industries, but what little evidence
              does exist is consistent with a Neanderthal origin. Several scholars have argued
              that these industries - like the Chatelperronian in France - were derived from a
              local      Mousterian. 3 However, we saw in Chapter 7 that pre-Upper
                      late

              Palaeolithic (PUP) blade-based industries appeared and disappeared much
              earlier, at sites in the   Middle East and southern Africa. In our opinion,
              therefore, the European industries were not the result of local evolution, the
              independent invention by Neanderthals of Upper Palaeolithic technology, but
              rather an imitation of technology of the incoming Moderns. One reason for this
              view is that - in contrast to the PUP - all the European industries are either
              contemporary with or postdate the appearance of the earliest Aurignacian
              industry, which is firmly associated with anatomically modern people.
                If the Neanderthals were responsible for the Chatelperronian, we can date
              their demise by the disappearance of their industry.   We can deduce, therefore,
              that the Neanderthals were gone from western Europe by 31,000 years ago. 4
              Apart from Saint-Cesaire, there is little other physical evidence of the very last
              Neanderthals but    this   does include a lower jaw from Zaffaraya Cave in
              southeastern Spain, some teeth from one of the Arcy caves (Renne) in France,
              an adolescent skeleton and the remains of a child from Le Moustier, and
              various skeletal parts from the cave of Vindija in Croatia. Sadly, the Vindija
              remains seem to have suffered badly before excavation since some show signs of
              burning and cut marks; and the Le Moustier fossils suffered badly afterwards -
              the child's remains were lost soon after their discovery and the adolescent
              skeleton was partially destroyed by the allied bombing of Berlin in 1945. The
              Vindija remains are especially controversial, because it is claimed that some
              were found in a level containing an Aurignacian bone point. 5 If this were so, it
              would be the only such association between the Neanderthals and the
              Aurignacian, but there are too      many uncertainties in     the excavation to
              guarantee the association; direct radiocarbon accelerator dating might help to
              establish the respective ages of the bone point and the hominids.
                The Vindija finds are also interesting in their own right because, compared
              with Saint-Cesaire, they suggest that a less robust late Neanderthal population
              was living there. However, it is unclear whether these Neanderthals were less
              robust because they were physically smaller than average; as a result of gene
              flow from contemporaneous early Moderns; or because they were evolving
              beyond the 'typical' Neanderthal morphology. If the last were the case, the
              multiregionalists could claim the Vindija individuals as intermediates between
              the Neanderthals and early Moderns; but        we believe the remains are too




182
                                                                             THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



incomplete (and seemingly rather late) to make any convincing case.                        The
Neanderthal remains from La Ferrassie in France, which some archaeologists
believe came from a family cemetery, might also be relatively late in time, since
they are not necessarily associated with the 'La Ferrassie' variant of the
Mousterian also found at the site.


Close encounters of a European kind

So, the picture we have of Europe between 40,000 and 30,000 years ago is of an
encounter between long-established natives and an incoming population. The
newcomers were one step ahead                   technologically,   and were     fully   modern
anatomically. But that does not mean, as is often assumed, that they were fully
European-looking: in fact they were physically unlike their successors of the
last   10,000 years. Their faces were flatter, with more prominent cheek bones
and lower, less prominent noses. Their skulls were larger, longer and relatively
lower. As we have mentioned, some of them - especially the males - had rather
bulging occipital bones, reflecting the large occipital lobes of the brain within.
Because this area is also particularly prominent in the Neanderthals, it is one of
the reasons put forward for including the Neanderthals in modern European
ancestry; but the feature          is   also    found   in   Moderns well away from the
Neanderthal zone (in Africa, South America and Australia), so it may reflect a
parallel development in modern humans rather than a significant evolutionary

link to the Neanderthals. The same may be said for the common presence of a
mandibular foramen in both Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons. The teeth and
jaws of the Cro-Magnons are larger than in modern Europeans, as was average
stature and (probably) lean            body weight. Estimates put early Cro-Magnon
height at about 1 .84    m (6   ft 1   in) in males and 1 .67   m (5   ft 6 in) in females, with

lean body weight at perhaps 70 and 5 5 kg ( 1 54 and 1 2 1 lb) respectively. So while
body weight was comparable with that of Neanderthals, the weight was
distributed differently, and the body proportions certainly contrasted strongly,
an indication of possible warm adaptation in the ancestors of the Cro-Magnons.
Compared with modern European body weights - about 70 kg ( 1 54 lb) in males
and 58 kg (128 lb) in females - the Cro-Magnons were quite similar, but they
were tall in comparison with their modern European counterparts, who average
about 1 .75   m (5   ft 8 in) in males   and 1 .62 m (5 ft 4 in) in females. There was also
a whole range of differences between Cro-Magnon and Neanderthal skeletons,

in such details as femoral shape and pelvic shape. One thing the Neanderthals

and early Moderns did share, however, was a larger average brain size than
present-day humans, including                  modern Europeans. As we discussed             in
Chapter 4, this may be related to the heavy body size of both the early European
groups.
   So where did the Cro-Magnons come from? Apparently not from the
Neanderthals, who went their own way in evolutionary terms over a 200,000-
year period or more, a trajectory which took them away from the Cro-Magnons
in features such as face and nose shape, and body proportions, but parallel to




                                                                                                      183
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



              them or towards them (if you are a multiregionalist) in characteristics such as
              increased brain size and smaller teeth. If, as we suspect, the early modern
              people came into Europe bringing an early form of the Aurignacian tool
              industry (such as the one known at Bacho Kiro in Bulgaria), could they have
              evolved from people like the early Moderns of Skhul and Qafzeh? That seemed
              a reasonable enough proposition to the scholars who dubbed these finds 'proto-
              Cro-Magnons', 6 but if they are 60,000 years older than the Cro-Magnons, as
              suggested by the TL and ESR dates (Chapter 5), what happened in between? If
              the Skhul and Qafzeh samples represent a brief and premature Out of Africa 2
              expansion which came to nothing, there is no necessary connection between
              them and later anatomically modern humans. But if populations like Skhul and
              Qafzeh moved northwards and eastwards, they could have continued
              dispersing all the way to Australia, where humans may have arrived by 55,000
              years ago (Chapter 6). Apparently they did not move westwards into Europe for
              some considerable time after this, which leaves open the question of their
              relationship to the Cro-Magnons. According to the geneticists, modern
              Europeans and east Asians are closely related, with a possible divergence date
              of less than 60,000 years ago. If this is accurate, there may have been a post-
              Skhul/Qafzeh ancestral population for modern Eurasians and native Ameri-
              cans, probably separate not only from Africans, but from Australians as well.
              Whether these proto-Eurasians lived in Asia (e.g. in the Middle East or the
              Indian subcontinent) or North Africa is unclear, but all the evidence suggests
              that the Neanderthals were not challenged on their home territory in Europe
              until after 45,000 years ago.
                If we can accept, as seems likely, that the Aurignacian was associated with
              the spread of Cro-Magnons into Europe, then the timing and direction of their
              colonization can be reconstructed. 7 The earliest Aurignacian sites, more than
              40,000 years old, are found in the centre and east of Europe. The next oldest are
              in the northernmost Iberian peninsula, suggesting an initial southern extension

              of their range. By 36,000 years ago we find Aurignacian industries in southern
              Germany and by 34,000 years ago they are well established in southwest
              France. This pattern of dates emphasizes the refuge in which the last French
              Neanderthals lived and the marginal nature of peninsular Europe within the
              wider picture of human evolution. How different this is from the complex
              anatomical and archaeological sequences we have seen in the Middle East
              (Chapters 5 and 7)!
                We also have a good idea of the climatic background to the appearance of
              modern humans in Europe, from data such as French and Greek pollen cores. 8
              Around 60,000 years ago, Europe was relatively warm and wet. But over the
              next 20,000 years, the climate deteriorated markedly, reaching a cold, dry
              minimum by 45,000 years ago. For the following 15,000 years (until about
              30,000 years ago), the climate continued to fluctuate, but overall it improved.
              Some French sites record brief periods of mixed oak forests replacing more
              open vegetation, matching episodes of weathering in European caves; both
              indicate short, warmer interstadials during this time.




184
                                                                                                                 ~




                  .._
                        S5P*W
  w^
            ;'Jr?ZjSk
            '
                                           ^V                                      HS>v '^^
                                                                                       v
                                                                                   **?-^^^^^
                                                                                                             ^^^ ^^^H
 WTor   '




Wk'W                             \
                                                         ^H                ^^r
                                                                                                                                          ^^H

                                           --
                                                     ^^KL|
                                                                                   SI A                     ^^       ; *'"'                     ^H



                                                                                   Hf *^                     If 1                               Br
                   M
                                                    W
                            -A
            )
                 ^Wftm
                ^"^                  1 V            *-        .
                                                                      ""
                                                                           1                                     JfPl^fe,                       JPp

                                 "i             s
                                                                               .
                                                                                        7^g/^~j3 '»-   ^*/'*^tet-'<               <    trS^'




                             i
                                           8k >                   1
                                                                  |                                          *£'              "

                                                                                                                                      *«ftM
                  ^ i.
                                                                                                        .




                                                                  1
                        -




                                           L ^^-' 1      :
                                                             -v




    79 This comparison of the Neanderthal skull from La Ferrassie (left) and the early modern skull
    from Cro-Magnon emphasizes just how different the two peoples were.
                                                                                                                                                                                  .




                                                                      ^^^                                                         -
                                                                                                                                      ^^Sj^t^      "'-*.'
                                                                                                                                                            -



          jtfi
                     ja^m^-
                         -^a| gr <d
                           \,-                                                                                         W   '
                                                                                                                               ,j&M£fo£&3%a&L.
                                                                                                                                 'if''        ^^•'•f*^          ^^B       ~"*^^H




                                                                 ^'   ^                                >       ^w|     Ipfjs     i    ill     -*

                                                                                                               Wnbj|l^pHNL^n3|^MBife^                                                 K
                                                                              :




       Fill                                          ^BMl   <*   UnfL,                            ;

                                                                                                      f5                             i   ^^^M                   Moif
                                                                                                                                                                    >J^-^:
   !



         ^PlS                                    ^K>                                                                    '^ZK^^**|^ .-*
          TBJ
                                                                                    *   .
                                                                                            »'

                                                                                                                           HHk -^i^ '^k                                       s




            ^~       ^^B
                  3^fMi
                                        ^j&^^kV*
                                    -* ^-^
                                                     £H               -
                                                                                    M&&-r m*
                                                                                   /-C^""*!^.
                                                                                   *r     ^rms^Jm
                                                                                           **(Lv
                                                                                                  $w#
                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                               ^^<f«k
                                                                                                                                          .                  A
                                                                                                                                                            ^r
                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                          "'"•
                                                                                                                                                                          .




                iB*^
                n
                \,
                  * X
                                 >'"             -


                                                                 K.
                                                                          :       ,*& * , rk«r
                                                                                   "^-^zi^*^-    *id^H                                   > *iy
                                                                                                                                           ^BVvV-
                      ^^^H£*^SET-   -   f.jJB   tH
                                                                      ^^^                        .*• fl



                     ^ifl                                                                                                                     ***&&




Comparing Neanderthals and Moderns


8o {Top) Photograph of two French Neanderthals (La
Chapelle-aux-Saints, left and La Ferrassie, right) with Cro-
Magnon [, illustrating their facial dissimilarities.
8i (Above) Basal view of the Ferrassie Neanderthal (left) and
Cro-Magnon i. The skulls are of similar overall size, but the
Neanderthal has a flatter cranial base with retreating cheek
bones and the upper jaw positioned forwards.

82 (Above right) Neanderthal features are already apparent in
the nine-year-old Neanderthal child from Teshik Tash in
Uzbekistan (cast, right). Compared with that of a slightly
younger modern child, the Neanderthal skull is longer and
wider, with a developing brow ridge and a large face and nose.

83 (Right) A comparison of the Amud (cast, left) and Saint-
Cesaire fossils. Both represent relatively late Neanderthals in
their regions.
84 (Above) The rear profiles of an early modern skull (Pfedmosti
3, cast, left) and a Neanderthal (La Ferrassie).


85 (Below) Comparison of casts of the Jebel Irhoud (left) and
Qafzeh 6 skulls. Although Irhoud 1 has a more primitive vault,
their facial proportions are very similar.

86 (Bottom) The Qafzeh 9 early Modern (cast, left) and Tabun
Neanderthal may have been near contemporaries in the Middle
East about 100,000 years ago.
                                                         *
                                                             S'

                                                                  '
                                                       is*   '




                                                                  ^sv




87 (Above) Life-size reconstruction of a man using a
spearthrower. Developed by the Cro-Magnons, this
device represented a major advance in hunting
technology, since it could propel spears further and
with a much greater speed and accuracy than
hitherto.

88 {Below) Art, ornament, dress codes and jewelry
were significant developments during the Upper
Palaeolithic. This (reconstructed) necklace was made
from pierced fox teeth, dentalia shells and fossils
which may, on occasion, have been traded over large
distances.
The cultural explosion of the Upper Palaeolithic




89,90 The structured organization of living areas and
the construction of huts was unknown before the
Upper Palaeolithic. (Above left) Some 385 mammoth
bones, including over 95 mandibles, were excavated
at the site of Mezhirich in the Ukraine,   dating from
about 18,000 years ago. The bones are thought to
have formed the walls of a hut, reconstructed here. A
mammoth skull painted with hematite was also
discovered at the site. (Above right) Reconstruction
of a hypothetical Upper Palaeolithic domestic
dwelling. There is no evidence that the Neanderthals
built complex structures such as these.

91 (Left) The most famous Venus figurine, carved in
limestone, from Willendorf in Austria. Most of these
statuettes date to between 23,000 and 21,000 years
ago, at a time when the climate was deteriorating due
to the onset of the last glacial   maximum 18,000 years
ago.
                                                                  fy
92 (Right, above) Evidence for Middle Palaeolithic
art and symbolism is extremely rare. This piece of
bone from Bacho Kiro in Bulgaria bears heavily
incised lines, but it probably lacked any symbolic
meaning.
                                                          '.•.-

93,94 (Right) A lion-headed anthropomorphic
statuette, one of the earliest known works of art.
Carved from a small mammoth tusk this figure
dates to the Aurignacian (early Upper
Palaeolithic) more than 32,000 years ago. It was
found in the Stadel Cave of southern Germanv.
95 Franz Wcidenreich was one of the creators of the model of multiregional evolution. Here he is
pictured amongst remains from Zhoukoudian. Referred to as Peking Man, these fossils formed an
important part of his theory.
                                                                       ^'vjV
                                                          »
                                                              4 lira

                                                               f
                                                               &f*&%
                                                                   4


                                                          i

                                                      /
                                                          !^^~            1
                                                                              i \
                                                      I




Protagonists in the Neanderthal
debate




96 The participants of a 1986 conference at the
School of American Research in Santa Fe included a
number of prominent figures in the debate on
modern human origins: (back row, from left) Fred
Smith, Ofer Bar Yosef, Jean-Philippe Rigaud,
Milford Wolpoff and Lewis Binford; (front row)
Jean Auel (a conference sponsor), Chris Stringer,
Erik Trinkaus (conference organizer), Randall White
and Jane Buikstra (conference moderator).

97 Bernard Vandermeersch has excavated and
studied many important fossil hominids, including
those from Qafzeh, Kebara, Biache and
Saint-Cesaire.

98 Rebecca Cann, one of the pioneers of the use of
mitochondrial    DNA
                   in the reconstruction of human
evolution.
99 Milford Wolpoff, a champion of
multiregional evolution, meets the
Sangiran 17 skull of Homo erectus from
Java, which he believes could be
ancestral to present-day indigenous
Australians.

100 Chris Stringer with the Jebel
Irhoud 1 skull from Morocco, a
possible ancestor he believes for all
modern humans.
                                                                    THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



  It   was during the fluctuating climates of 45,000-30,000 years ago that
modern humans seemingly arrived in Europe and must have coexisted in a
general way with the last Neanderthals. However, we do not have the detailed
archaeological, fossil and chronological records to ascertain exactly how closely
the two biologically distinct groups lived. Did they, for instance, share the same
environments, the same valleys or even the same caves? We will look at this
question from the behavioural point of view in the next chapter, but here we
will consider whether the Cro-Magnons could have acted as 'Killer Africans'

(to use Milford WolpofFs choice phrase) and wiped out the Neanderthals they

encountered.
  In an area as large as Europe, with its varied environments and over a
timespan of perhaps 10 millennia, many different kinds of interactions could
have occurred (and probably did occur), ranging from avoidance to tolerance to
interbreeding, and from conflict and economic competition to friendship and
an exchange of ideas. As Paul Graves has suggested, if the Cro-Magnons passed
on some of their technological innovations to the Neanderthals, perhaps the
Neanderthals reciprocated by sharing their long experience of dealing with the
                                    9
Ice Age environments of Europe.         As we have already mentioned, there are
occasional hints of interbreeding between the two populations of hominids e.g.
the bulging occipital bone of one of the Cro-Magnon skulls, or the projecting
mid-face of one of the Moderns from Pfedmosti. We are not sure that such
features do in fact represent the result of interbreeding, but even assuming they
do, we believe that such instances were exceptions, and that there was minimal
gene flow (interbreeding) between the two populations.
  The question of whether the Neanderthals represented a distinct species
from modern humans depends on whether the anatomical and behavioural
differences between them and us are emphasized, or the features they share
with us. Their anatomy certainly suggests to us that they should not be
classified within our species, as does that of comparable samples from Asia and

Africa (e.g. Dali, Zuttiyeh, Broken Hill). But excluding a fossil human from
Homo sapiens on the basis of its anatomy does not necessarily imply that the
individual was unable to interbreed with       modern humans. Closely related
biological species are often interfertile, and may or may not produce fertile
offspring when they hybridize. Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons would have
been quite closely related, and genetically there may have been no barrier to
Neanderthal/Cro-Magnon interbreeding. It would probably have been
predominantly behavioural barriers that kept them distinct from one another.
The two populations would have contrasted physically, and may have had
major differences in language and gestural expressions. Hybrids, if they existed
and were    fertile,   may have been      discriminated   against   by the parent
populations, ensuring that the flow of genes between the parent populations
was restricted.
  If the Cro-Magnons became more skilled at coping with and exploiting the
European environments than the Neanderthals, the Cro-Magnon populations
and ranges would have increased. With only finite resources, the Neanderthals




                                                                                             193
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



              would have suffered from economic competition unless they withdrew to more
              marginal areas (such as, in this context, the southern Iberian and northern
              British peninsulae). If the Cro-Magnons occupied the more favourable and
              sheltered lowland valleys, the Neanderthals would have had to occupy higher
              or less-sheltered ground. In a normal summer this would have posed them few
              problems, but in more inclement weather their populations would have been
              put under severe stress. They would have suffered from higher infant mortality
              rates and shorter lifespans. Repeated across various parts of Europe and over
              many centuries or even millennia, this attrition would probably have caused
              Neanderthal populations gradually to decline towards extinction.
                 In fact, using a computer-simulated model, archaeologist Ezra Zubrow has
              shown how rapidly the Neanderthals could have become extinct. 10 Assuming
              interaction between stable populations of Neanderthals and Moderns, a
              Neanderthal mortality rate only 2 per cent higher than that of the Moderns
              could have resulted in Neanderthal extinction within about 1,000 years. So,
              when run through the computer, we see unfolding the possible long-term
              demographic history of the interaction between the two populations. In
              Zubrow's words, the demographic fate of the Neanderthals thus simulated 'is
              not a photograph but the trail of death'.
                None of this, of course, explains exactly what took place as the local
              populations of Neanderthals were replaced. It is improbable, as Paul Graves
              has recently pointed out, that anything resembling a clash from recent colonial
              history took place, with one side packing all the resources, fire-power and
              know-how to triumph in an unequal contest. 11 But it is evident that the days of
              the Neanderthal era in Europe were numbered when the Cro-Magnons first
              arrived. The Neanderthals did not evolve into modern Europeans and their
              role in the shape of Europeans to come was minimal.
                 The exact relationship of Cro-Magnons to modern Europeans is, as we have
              said, still unclear. If their skull measurements are compared    with data from
              different modern populations, they are scattered in their affiliations. While the
              Mladec 1 woman seems European enough, many others (such as those from
              Pfedmosti and Cro-Magnon) seem allied to distant populations in Asia, Africa,
              Australia or the Americas. This does not mean that the Cro-Magnons were the
              ancestors of all these populations, but it may indicate that the Cro-Magnons
              were either racially undifferentiated, or that they represented a race or races
              with their own combination of features unlike any found today.




194
                                  CHAPTER 9


               Close Kin or Distant Relatives?



Right at the beginning of the book we asked whether the Neanderthals were
close kin or distant relatives, direct lineal ancestors to modern humans or not.
In order to answer this question we needed not only to examine the origins of
the Neanderthals,    what they looked like, where they lived and under what
conditions, and how they survived, but also to look at their more primitive
predecessors, Homo erectus, and the rise of their modern successors, Homo
sapiens.   We saw in Chapter 8 that the Neanderthals were probably extinct by
30,000 years ago and we discussed their fate from an anatomical point of view.
In this chapter we will investigate the question from a behavioural perspective,
comparing the behaviour of the Moderns with what we know of the behaviour
of the Neanderthals (Chapter 7). But first let us take a brief look at two popular
accounts of the Neanderthal demise.



Two popular fates for the Neanderthals
In Chapter 1 we saw some of the many, changing faces of the Neanderthals in
art,   science and fiction.   Not surprisingly, the Neanderthal story has also
received many different endings, although most of these ultimately seem to
favour either replacement or continuity, in some guise or other. According to
H.G. Wells (The Grisly Folk), for instance, the Neanderthals were brought to
bay over the long millennia of the Ice Age by the 'First True Men', who
invaded their lands and slaughtered them. Similar endings, in which the savage
is   subjugated by the civilized, have been repeated many times in fiction. For
example, at the same time that Wells was writing The Grisly Folk, Marjorie and
C.H.B. Quennell produced their children's book, Everyday Life in the Old
Stone Age. First published in 1921 they summed up the extinction of the
Neanderthals in the following terms: 'He had done as much as was possible for
him. His large head, with the thick frontal bones, must have been very good for
butting a brother Neanderthal, but it was no use against the stone wall of
advancing civilization, and like the Tasmanian and Bushman, the Red Indian
and Australian of nowadays, he fades out of the picture, and his place is taken
by a cleverer people.' With evolutionary 'dead ends', such 'mercy' killings
                          1




apparently came as something of a         relief.   The fate of the Neanderthals
symbolized what many then saw not only as the inevitable but also as the
desirable removal of other so-called primitives from the earth - an everyday
story of colonial folk.
     The popular alternative to an abrupt replacement of the Neanderthals is the




                                                                                     195
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               argument for survival. For example, Milford Wolpoff, a leading exponent of
               the multiregional model, likes to     tell   conference audiences that he sees a
               Neanderthal every morning in his shaving mirror. Even if the Neanderthals are
               not to be found on the bus or football field, there are many who believe they
               roam the margins of the civilized world. For example, in her book entitled (in
               the US) Still Living?: Yeti, Sasquatch and the Neanderthal Enigma the former
               archaeologist Myra Shackley makes the case that the strange creatures
               supposed to live in the mountains of the Old World - the Almas, Yetis and
               Abominable Snowmen - are in fact refuge pockets of Neanderthals. 2 The idea,
               purporting to be based on scientific evidence, was widely circulated in the
               Sunday Times magazine of 23 January 1983, where one of Maurice Wilson's
               paintings appeared under the headline 'Are these prehistoric people living
               today?'
                  But Shackley's evidence is as illusory as a melting footprint. In trying to link
               the Almas of the Caucasus and Pamirs of Outer Mongolia to the Neanderthals,
               she remarks: 'The characteristic skull shape - a long, low-vaulted cranium with
               prominent brow ridges and jutting jaw [sic] - is curiously reminiscent of
               descriptions of Almas, as is the recorded Neanderthal height of about 5 ft 6 in [our
               emphasis].' 3 This could just as easily be interpreted to mean that Neanderthals
               are alive and well and living wherever such features can be found. In reply to
               her assertion that 'it is certainly curious that 'wild men' in some shape or form
               crop up so consistently, associated with almost everybody who had a recorded
               culture', 4   we point out that the concept of primitiveness is the necessary
               invention of all civilizations. It is part of the inherited cultural baggage of the
               last 4,000 years: there is nothing curious about it. Such portmanteaux contain

               no half truths about human evolution, only a potential source for shaping
               cultural attitudes towards distant relatives and other cultures. Wilson's
               painting is a good example of presenting an argument about the past as an
               image; it is most certainly not evidence, as used by Shackley.



               A scientific fate
               Why are we so convinced that there is no place for Neanderthals in modern
               European and Middle Eastern ancestry? How can we be so sure that the major
               contribution to our present physical appearance and behaviour, whether we are
               European or Japanese, African or Inuit, came from a second wave of hominids
               out of Africa, this time of anatomically modern humans?
                  We believe there are two compelling lines of evidence. In the first place we
               have seen repeatedly in earlier chapters the evidence from our own biology, be it
               limb length or mtDNA, which points to a swamping of the Old World Ancients
               by Moderns who came from Africa. Africa is the only continent where the
               equivalent of a 'Neanderthal phase' in modern human ancestry - one of the
               central beliefs of the proponents of multiregional evolution - can be supported
               by anatomical and genetic evidence. In all instances, the trail leads us back to
                                                                                 5
               Africa as the single continental centre for our physical origins.




196
                                                                     CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES]



  What must be made clear is that biological replacement does not imply
genocide of the Neanderthals. As one of us (Chris Stringer) has recently
pointed out, the Neanderthals probably went with a whimper rather than a
bang. 6   The fate of the Neanderthals as we see it was one of a gradual
displacement to more marginal and less favourable environments (Chapter 8)
rather than defeat in     some   sort   of territorial battle. Yet such colonial
metaphors, as Wells elaborates in The Grisly Folk, are frequently used to
portray the fate of the Neanderthals. The truth is that we do not (and probably
never will) know the precise details of what occurred. We can only suppose that
many different pathways led to the same result, in contrast to the frequently
mistaken assumption that a common end must mean a single route.
  This introduces our second line of evidence for replacement, the behaviour of
Ancients and Moderns. In the         first   place   we need to consider if modern
behaviour and anatomy both originated in the same place, Africa. Certainly,
archaeological evidence of the earliest anatomically modern              humans in the
Middle East, from such sites as Qafzeh, suggests a more complicated picture
than a single centre for the origins of both modern physique and modern
behaviour. Secondly, what do we expect behavioural replacement to have
involved? Were Neanderthals, as an example of one regional population of
Ancients, incapable of adopting any or all the patterns of modern behaviour?
Or did they manage to incorporate into their existing routines some of the new
ideas about technology and the use of the environment? If so, the adoption of
how many new ideas would win the case for behavioural continuity? And would
the   speed   of this   adoption affect our decision           whether continuity or
replacement of behaviour best explains the archaeological record?
  In Chapter 7 we set out the evidence for the behaviour of the Ancients,
focusing in particular on the Neanderthals. In this chapter               we will again
concentrate on the European evidence, for              it   clearly illustrates   that the
behaviour of the Moderns was of a completely different order of complexity
from that of their predecessors.        We will argue that replacement of the
Neanderthals by the Moderns can be the only plausible explanation for these
differences in behaviour, given the absence of evidence for a gradual change
from one way of life to the other.
  We will investigate the major differences in behaviour between Ancients and
Moderns at the three levels we discussed in Chapter 7: the construction of
campsites, the use of the landscape, and expansion into new habitats. These
changes are summarized in the table overleaf, which chronicles the appearance
of some of the main elements of modern life, such as art, technology, houses and
colonization. The crucial part of the table to focus on is the 20,000-year period
(60,000 to 40,000 years ago)  when a number of these important aspects
developed   -  although by no means the entire cultural package that
characterizes modern humans. In order to avoid concentrating too heavily on
one small corner of the world (Europe), we have expanded the geographical
coverage of the table to include the first recorded evidence, anywhere, for the
traits which together define modern behaviour.




                                                                                                  197
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



                                             YEARS             AGO
                                           ooo          00°                    00°              ooo      ^ 0i0oo
              80                                                             ,0,           20
                             MIDDLE      PALAEOLITHIC                EARLY         UPPER         LATE
                                                                       PALAEOLITHIC              UPPER
                                                                                                PALAEO-
                                                                                                LITHIC

                                                                                                           >art
                                                                                                           ^bone tools
                                                                                                           ^blade technology
                                                                                                           ^ceramic technology
                                                                                                           ^body ornament
   a>   a)                                                                                                 ^artifact styles
   •c   o
   - o
   <o   c                                                                                                  ^   built hearths
                                                                                                           > structured living
                                                                                                               space and windbreaks
                                                                                                           ^cave 'burials'
                                                                                                           ^open site burials
                                                                                                           ^storage pits
                                                                                           o
                                                                                                           >huts
                                                                                                           -^microliths


                                                                                           o
                                                                                                           ^quarries
        0)


   ?    c                                                                                                  ^regional art
   .2   -C
                                                                                                           ^long-distance exchange
   d>   X
   £ 9                                                                                                     ^of raw materials
   5
   o
        TO
        c                                                                                                  ^chains of connection
   a)   .2
                                                                                                           ^long-term occupation of
   -J   <i>
                                                                                                             harsh environments
                                                                                                           ^social storage




                                                                                                           ^sea voyaging
                                                                                                               colonization of:
                                                                                                           ^      boreal forest

                                                                                                                   high mountains

                                                                                                                   deep deserts
   £    X
                                                                                                                   tropical rain forests

   il                                                                                                              small islands
   s 8
   —c *.o
   I    81

    £   z
    a £
   UJ
                                                                                                           ^spoken language

                                                                                                           ^increased forward
                                                                                                               planning




                   74    The changes in behaviour between the Ancients and Moderns, as captured in the archaeological
                        record. Clearly the period 60,000-40,000 years ago was a crucial one, for it is only after this
                        point that so many of the elements associated with modern behaviour are to be widely found.
                                                               CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES.'



  What the table shows is that certain basic survival techniques at the campsite
level show some continuity, among them stone blade technologies, 'burials' and

rudimentary windbreaks. Blades and burials (e.g. Qafzeh and Tabun) are
found before the all-important period 60,000 to 40,000 years ago; the first
artificial windbreaks only appear during it. But evidence for more intensive use

of landscapes, such as the long-distance movement of raw materials like amber
and shell is almost always found after 40,000 years ago. On the other hand,
expansion outside those areas of the Old World inhabited by the Ancients
probably did take place during the aforementioned 20,000-year period: dates of
50,000 or more years ago for the sea crossing to Australia and Papua New
Guinea demonstrate that technological innovation (boats) and colonizing
ability was taking place on a hitherto unknown scale. And this is a telling point,

as we shall see later, since the first humans who reached Australia were almost
certainly modern, both physically and behaviourally.
  Our aim in the rest of the chapter will be to flesh out this table and to discuss
the enormous changes in behaviour that took place in Europe 40,000 years ago
- changes which we believe convincingly prove that replacement, rather than
continuity, is the best explanation for current evidence.



LIFE AT THE FIRESIDE
The reader will recall from Chapter 7 that there is scant evidence for the
structured organization of living areas among any of the Ancients -
Neanderthals included. The Ancient's use of their living space, be it a
rockshelter or an open site, is unfamiliar to us, and even something as basic as a
permanent open-air, stone-lined hearth was absent in Europe until 60,000-
40,000 years ago (see table). Evidence for the constructon of huts, as we saw, is
even more elusive. We debated the issue of burial in Chapter 7; here we will
discuss   what further inferences can be drawn about         ritual   and religious
behaviour.   And finally, the absence until the Upper Palaeolithic of art,
ornament or items of display is particularly striking. We cannot blame poor
preservation for the scarcity of these 'modern' features, because some of the
locations inhabited   by the Ancients are among the best-preserved of the
Palaeolithic. So, taken together, this evidence suggests that the life-style of the
Ancients was very different from that of their successors.
  The Ancient life-style was not simply confined to the Neanderthals or
western Eurasians: throughout the Old World - from the Cape of southern
Africa, across the Indian subcontinent and Central Asia to the archipelagos of
Southeast Asia, and north again to China - we find a consistent archaeological
record. There may be regional variety in the typology of stone tools, but current
research suggests that the availability of raw materials and local patterns of land
use are probably largely responsible for the variety that did exist. The Ancients,
everywhere, displayed similar behaviour when it came to elementary spatial
organization, while the fact that they did not elaborate their material culture
makes it difficult to recognize that face in WolpofF's mirror.




                                                                                            199
     CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



                          Let us contrast this for a moment with the behaviour of the Moderns after
                        their arrival in   Europe 40,000 years ago. It is very striking just how much
                        spatial patterning there now is to the archaeological record.       This is the case
                        both in rockshelters such as Arcy-sur-Cure in northern France and at open
                        sites as widely scattered as the early levels at Kostenki on the   Don River, Dolni
                        Yestonice in Moravia and the        site   of Lommersum near Koln. 7      The new
                        organization of sites was clearly down to the Moderns for the most part, and
                        even in those rare instances where the Neanderthals seem to have been
                        responsible, we argue that the changes were influenced by the Moderns; they
                        were not developed independently by the Neanderthals.


                        The Neanderthals and the Chatelperronian
                        Changes in stone tool technology have traditionally been used as one of the
                        most important yardsticks with which to measure progress and development
                        during the Palaeolithic, but in fact tool types are often an unreliable gauge of
                        significant behavioural changes, as we shall now see.
                          Arcy-sur-Cure is a complex of caves in the Paris basin of which the Grotte du
                        Renne (Reindeer Cave) was excavated by a great pioneer of Palaeolithic spatial
                        archaeology, Andre Leroi-Gourhan. In this cave, he excavated a series of levels
                        which spanned the late Mousterian and earliest Upper Palaeolithic. The oldest
                        levels of the latter contained the distinctive points - with curved, steeply

                        blunted backs - of the Chatelperronian industry. Radiocarbon dates for level
                        VIII, in which these points were found, are of the order of 33,860 years ago, and
                        associated with the tools were a few pieces of carved bone and drilled animal
                        canines. In the lower level X, Leroi-Gourhan excavated a dozen living surfaces

     A Chdtelperroman   which contained mammoth tusks and traces of post holes left by stakes driven
25
point from Arcy-sur-    into the earth during hut construction.
Cure; possibly a          Major excavations at the Grotte du Renne took place in the 1950s. At that
Xeanderthal imitation
of Upper Palaeolithic
                        time opinion was divided about the status of this and other Chatelperronian
technology.             assemblages. As     we saw in Chapter 8, for instance, French archaeologist
                        Francois Bordes maintained that these distinctive points, and indeed the entire
                        technological style of the industry, was derived from the so-called late
                        Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition B. Other scholars were unconvinced,
                        wishing to see the Chatelperronian as a later intrusion into the area since it
                        contained a predominance of blanks struck from carefully prepared blade
                                                                                            8
                        cores, rather than the characteristic flakes of the Mousterian.
                          These blades are important. The prepared core techniques that must have
                        been used to produce them are a departure from both the Levallois and disc
                        core methods discussed in Chapter 7. Flaking the nodule to produce a core that
                        can then be rotated to keep striking offslender, parallel-sided blades was a truly
                        novel form of using raw material. But we have also seen that it was not an Upper
                        Palaeolithic innovation in the old sense of such a term, so it is not a reliable
                        indicator of the     different   flint-working techniques of the Ancients and
                        Moderns. We have also discussed the Howiesons Poort assemblages of blades




     200
                                                                CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



and microliths from Klasies River Mouth and other South African sites which
show that so-called Upper Palaeolithic technologies could exist in the Middle
Palaeolithic. The appearance and disappearance of comparable PUP (pre-
             9


Upper Palaeolithic) assemblages in the long sequences at Haua Fteah in Libya
and the Mount Carmel cave of Tabun adds a much wider geographical spread.
We would not be surprised if future research yields similar instances of PUP
assemblages sandwiched stratigraphically between regular Middle Palaeolithic
strata in other parts of Asia.

  A further complication comes from Anthony Marks' excavations at Boker
Tachtit in the Negev Desert. 10 This open site has four levels, the earliest dated
to 47,000 years ago.   Within this one sequence is evidence for the shift from
Middle to Upper Palaeolithic - flake to blade - technologies. However, one of
the end-products, a projectile known as an Emireh point, remains constant.
Indeed the careful refitting offtakes back to their original core shows that the
knapper started by making such points with a thoroughly Middle Palaeolithic,
Levallois technique. However, as the nodule was reduced in size the toolmaker
changed to an Upper Palaeolithic blade technique to knap the remaining
points. There is no clue as to which hominid produced this tool, and gave us a
transitional nodule in a transitional industry. It would be nice to think that an
Ancient began the knapping and a Modern finished it! So Boker Tachtit deals a
further blow to the already crumbling edifice of traditional Palaeolithic theory,
the demolition aided, as we have seen, by the discovery of the intermittent
appearance of pre-Upper Palaeolithic industries and the association at Qafzeh
and Skhul caves of Middle Palaeolithic stone tools with modern humans.
Similar contradictions    to     established   notions   have been raised by the
colonization of Australia by Moderns who produced only rudimentary stone
tools rather than a European-style, Upper Palaeolithic blade technology. The
earlier   appearances of blade technologies should not therefore be read as
support for behavioural continuity. 11
  To continue the erosion of long-held views about technology and biology, we
saw in Chapter 8 that the Chatelperronian of Europe is now widely thought to
be the handiwork of Neanderthals. A careful review by Francis Harrold of the
French material indicates that this can be supported stratigraphically, 12 while a
flush of new dates for old sites and more recent discoveries have demonstrated
the overlap between these assemblages and the first 'true' Upper Palaeolithic.
Among these new finds is the important Neanderthal skeleton from the French
cave of Saint-Cesaire. It came from a Chatelperronian level which now has a
thermoluminescence date of 36,300 years ago. The possible hut structure in
one of the Chatelperronian levels at Arcy-sur-Cure may also have been erected
by the Neanderthals.
   It is interesting to observe that the transition in this area to a blade-based

technology (the Chatelperronian) and the appearance of structures at campsites
(Arcy-sur-Cure) only occurs long after the Moderns arrived in central Europe
and the Iberian peninsula. Imitation rather than invention therefore seems the
most plausible explanation for the change in Neanderthal behaviour.




                                                                                            201
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?


               The Moderns and the Aurignacian
               The first 'true' Upper Palaeolithic industry - in the sense that it was made by
               anatomically modern humans and has all the technological features and artistic
               additions normally expected of the Moderns - is widely recognized to be the
               Aurignacian. Along with such memorably named tool types as strangled
               blades,    nosed    scrapers   and    the   small   edge-nibbled    Dufor's    bladelets,
               Aurignacian flint assemblages notably contained bone and ivory projectile
               points. Such items were absent in the earlier phases of the Middle Palaeolithic
               and are extremely rare         in the   world-wide pre-Upper Palaeolithic. These
               projectiles form a cultural marker of considerable significance for typologists.
                    The earliest dates for the Aurignacian in Europe come from excavations by
               Janusz Kozlowski in the Bacho Kiro cave in Bulgaria. 13 These have produced a
               distinctive blade-dominated assemblage now classified as Aurignacian, radio-
               carbon dated to more than 43,000 years ago. In eastern and central Europe
               Aurignacian assemblages are consistently earlier than in France, which seems
               to   be one of the last strongholds of flake-based Mousterian industries and
               indeed, as the Saint-Cesaire find shows, a last refuge of the Neanderthals
               themselves. In the Middle East, the earliest Levantine x\urignacian - at the
               Lebanese rockshelter of Ksar Akil - may be as early as 44,000 years old, 14 while
               we have already discussed the dates of 47,000 years ago for the transitional
               industries at Boker Tachtit.         These dates point to an eastern origin for the
               European Upper Palaeolithic. Furthermore, we saw in Chapter 8 that the
               Aurignacian is associated with the spread of anatomically modern humans into
               Europe.
                    Currently, the earliest dates for the western Aurignacian come from Spain.
               At the impressive cave site of El Castillo, south of Santander, careful re-
               excavation by Victoria Cabrera Valdes has produced a detailed stratigraphy
               and dates of between 37,700 and 40,000 years ago for the Aurignacian levels.
               The cave site of l'Arbreda in Catalunya is dated to 38,500 years ago. 15 Early
               dates for the Aurignacian within France come from the Abri Pataud, 34,000
               years ago, while the sites of Roc de Combe and Piage contain alternating levels
               of Chatelperronian and Aurignacian industries, further supporting our view of
               southwest France as a cultural and biological refuge for the Neanderthals.
               There is evidence from Zaffaraya Cave that southern Spain may have fulfilled
               the same role.
                    Also highly significant     is   the   appearance of    art   in   association   with
               Aurignacian tools. The earliest examples take the form of small sculptures from
               the southern German sites of Stadel, Geissenklosterle and Vogelherd. At the
               first,   an impressive lion-headed anthropomorph was painstakingly recon-
               structed by JoachimHahn from many hundred pieces of a small broken
               mammoth tusk (pis. 93, 94). And in southwest France, limestone blocks
               engraved     with   signs   interpreted     as   vulvae   have   been   excavated     from
               Aurignacian levels at the sites of La Ferrassie and the rockshelters at Castanet
               and Blanchard.
                    Pierced deer and fox canines, shells, and carefully made ivory beads are also




202
                                                                CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



commonly found in Aurignacian levels (pi. 88). Building on research by Marcel
Otte, archaeologist Randall White has made a detailed study of these, and
demonstrated the range of different manufacturing techniques required to
produce the ivory beads. 16 Interestingly, he concludes that some areas were
obtaining the ivory from elsewhere. Southwest France was one of these.
Although the distances involved cannot yet be determined, we know that
mammoth remains were very rare at the sites in this region, whereas people in
Germany generally had immediate access to ivory sources.


Art and symbolism

What is the significance of the appearance of art and ornament? We argued in
Chapter 7 that earlier items are unconvincing as evidence for symbolic
behaviour either because they lack a context where symbolism might be
required (such as a burial) or because they are unique examples, unrelated to
any wider system that used the repetition of design and shape as symbols for
action. In our view, therefore, the emergence of art during the Aurignacian
clearly suggests that   replacement rather than continuity took place in this
fundamental aspect of modern behaviour.
  Geoff Clark and John Lindly, however, have argued conversely for a slow
build-up in the use of art and the development of associated symbolic
behaviour. 17 The artistic explosion, at least as measured by quantity, occurs
according to them after the last glacial maximum 18,000 years ago, almost
20,000 years after the appearance in Europe of the Aurignacian. It is at this time
that we find many more carved and engraved objects in Europe, as well as the
painted caves of Franco-Cantabria. Prior to this period, Clark and Lindly see a
continuity in this aspect of behaviour from the Ancients, with only a gradual
accrual in the human artistic repertoire.
  We believe that Clark and Lindly are mistaken in their interpretation. We
disagree with their insistence that symbolic behaviour is something that can be
turned up and down like a light on a dimmer switch. On the contrary, arranging
behaviour according to symbolic codes is an all or nothing situation. The onset
of symbolic behaviour can be compared to the flick of a switch or, as John
PfeirTer   put it, a creative explosion. 18 Symbolism involves making mental
substitutions   and appreciating associations between people, objects and
contexts; once established, symbolism cannot simply be dropped or forgotten.
Furthermore, symbolic behaviour requires          memory and periodic renewal
through repeated     ritual.   The   objects   used in such    rituals   tend to be
standardized, leading to the creation of a shared art form.
  One of the interesting questions to emerge from this discussion is why such
geographical variation exists in the quality and quantity of ritual art and
ornament after 40,000 years ago (particularly since the symbolic behaviour
associated with these objects was so clearly in practice).    Why is this aspect of
material culture so variable in parts of the Upper Palaeolithic world such as
China or India? To debate this issue in the detail it requires would fill an entire




                                                                                            203
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               book. Suffice it to say here that as research continues in these areas, evidence for
               ritual-based art probably will turn up, as it has in Australia.
                 The    Ancients,   including   the   Neanderthals,    therefore    seem    to   have
               constructed their social worlds in a very different way from the Moderns. As
               Alexander Marshack has put it, the Ancients' capacity for communication and
               the   construction   of their social world     'were utilized   in   a   historically,
               demographically and contextually different milieu than was present in the
               European Upper Palaeolithic'. 19


               Campsites as symbols
               Having investigated the appearance of symbolic behaviour by examining the
               changes in art and technology, we will now take a look at the evidence from
               campsites. The first steps towards the more formal living spaces that began in
               the period 60,000-40,000 years ago became a gallop in the early Upper
               Palaeolithic. Hearths, huts and the ordered distribution of materials now
               became common. In many parts of Europe, the period from 40,000 to 20,000
               years ago was one of great climatic stress and consequently low population
               densities (Chapter 2). Substantial sites were widely scattered. Several formed
               impressive open-air villages. Nowhere is this better demonstrated than at the
               Kostenki complex of Palaeolithic villages that nestle in a small, steep-sided
               ravine by the Don River. Fifty years of systematic excavation have unearthed a
               suite of villages. At Kostenki 11, dated to 19,900 years ago, the circular footings
               of a structure survive. This hut was built from neatly stacked mammoth bones
               and encloses an area of some 39 sq. m or 420 sq. ft (pi. 89). Storage pits
               surround the structure. Larger excavations have uncovered a different layout at
               the famous site of Kostenki 1 level 1 (Kostenki I/i), with dates from 24,100 to
               21,300 years ago. Here two lines of regularly spaced hearths - each containing
               an impressive amount of bone coal considering they were used at a time of scant
               timber resources - are surrounded by subterranean pit dwellings and a lunar
               landscape of post holes and pits. The latter contain stored bone for fuel and
               possibly food. Bones of fur-bearing animals and large lumps of red ochre were
               also found in these pits, along with many carved animal and female statuettes.
               When one compares behaviour at this site with that at the open Mousterian site
               of Erd in Hungary or La Borde in France, or even with that at the relatively
               nearby site of Molodova on the Dnestr River during the period 60,000 to 40,000
               years ago, there can be only one conclusion: that the huge changes in behaviour
               that took place in the early Upper Palaeolithic resemble the flick of a switch and
               not the slow upwards movement of a symbolic dimmer.
                 Not surprisingly, these differences seem greater in Europe than elsewhere in
               the world. At Kostenki the northern ice sheets were only 700 km (430 miles)
               away, and effective winter houses were a necessity. But these structures were no
               longer simply a place to keep warm: huts were grouped into small villages.
               Thus architecture now embodies cultural, symbolic behaviour and not purely
               expedient survival behaviour.




204
                                                                            CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



                                                                           u
                                                               Sf\
         O     Pits


         #     Hearths                                       o          •
                                                                               o
                                                                       •
          '#   Areas of ash
                                                                       •
                                                                                     o
                                                      o°




                                                                                          o
                         mmu
                                             ^                                 o
                                                  O

j6   The oldest village on the Russian steppes was constructed c. 21,000 years ago at Kostenki, on
the Don River. Storage pits and possibly dwellings surround two lines of hearths,   where mammoth
bones were burnt for fuel since timber was scarce.




Burials in the open

Throughout this period 40,000-20,000 years ago we find examples not only of
impressive structures and campsite layouts, culminating in Kostenki I/i, but
also the first open-air burials. The triple burial recently unearthed ahead of the

bulldozers at Dolni Vestonice             (fig.   77)   is   just the latest in a list of such
discoveries,made all the more impressive by the lack of anything remotely
resembling a burial from an open site in any earlier period. The cave sites also
contain rich and complex burials. Margherita Mussi has studied a well-known
group from the Italian riviera, drawing attention to the intricacy of grave goods
in the early Upper Palaeolithic - for example the use of different dress codes to

symbolize the different status of the deceased (fig. 78).




                                                                                                        205
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?




                                                \\ \   DV J2£F>?%               >^^S%
                                                             -Ft--   •   _i^:       m
                                                                                :l£FU




                                                                 fT?1 2 f^l 3[flf] <[0«3 5 |TT71


         77   .4 frf^/s krw/,  27,000 years old, found in ig8s at the open site of Dolni Vestonice, Moravia.
              The central individual (of uncertain sex) is flanked by two males, both of whom had ivory
          pendants circling their skulls. A fire had been lit over the bodies and allowed to burn briefly before
                                                   the grave was filled.




          78 A reconstruction of one of the huts excavated at Dolni Vestonice, probably 27,000 years old.
          The site has yielded the earliest evidence for a ceramic technology that produced artistic figurines
                                             as well as pieces offired clay.




206
                                                                     CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES!




jg     Three richly adorned burials from
the Italian   Upper Palaeolithic, in
which status and sex was codified in
dress and ornament. The male on the
left   was excavated from Arene
Candide, the two figures on the right
from Barma Grande.



Imitation and change

To summarize, life at the fireside changed substantially between the Ancients
and the Moderns. It changed because symbolism in the Upper Palaeolithic
suffused many elements of behaviour, determining such mundane aspects of
life as the use of space      and objects of everyday existence. 20 Does a comparison
of campsites indicate that the Ancients had a symbolically organized culture?
We think not. In our view, Chatelperronian stone tools and the rudimentary
structures found at such sites as Molodova and Arcy-sur-Cure are evidence
that the Neanderthals had the capacity for emulation, for change, but not for
symbolism.
       We explain this as follows: the Neanderthals were under selective pressure,
both biological and cultural, to survive. Their decisions about making tools and
building camps therefore changed according to expediency and efficiency, they
were not simply bound by millennia-long traditions. The various choices made
are reflected       by variation       in   the archaeological record of the Ancients,
particularly from the period between 60,000 and 40,000 years ago. However,
when Neanderthals and Moderns came                    into contact in western   Europe
between 40,000 and 35,000 years ago, the Moderns changed the forces of
selection on Neanderthal behaviour. The social world in which the European
Neanderthals now participated was fundamentally different from the preced-
ing 100,000 years, and the archaeological evidence clearly indicates that the
Neanderthals imitated certain aspects of modern behaviour. But while they
could emulate they could not fully understand. We suspect, for example, that
the structures at Molodova and Arcy-sur-Cure more resembled 'nests' than the
symbolic 'homes' of the Moderns at Kostenki or Dolni Vestonice.
       So now let us turn to other aspects of life, to see whether here too we can find
evidence both to support our case for replacement and to enhance our
argument that the main structural difference distinguishing the Moderns from
the Ancients was the practice of symbolically organized behaviour.




                                                                                                 207
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               LIFE ON THE LAND

               The distribution of raw materials - stone, amber, shell - and the appearance of
               widespread styles in projectile points, figurines and ornament provide another
               example of the huge differences between the behaviour of the Ancients and that
               of the Moderns.



               The distances stone travelled
               Recent work on the distribution of stone raw materials supplies a dramatic
               example of the different scale at which the Moderns used the glacial landscapes
               of Europe after 40,000 years ago. We saw in Chapter 7 that Middle Palaeolithic
               raw materials generally came from within a radius of 50 km (31 miles) of a site.
               There are instances of transport from further afield but these are the
               exceptions. But during the early Upper Palaeolithic, 40,000 to 20,000 years ago,
               these distances increased markedly. Janusz Kozlowski found in Aurignacian
               levels (somewhat older than 40,000 years ago) at Bacho Kiro that 53 per cent of
               the flint used to make the blades was imported from more than 120 km (75
               miles)   away.    Elsewhere    in   early   Upper      Palaeolithic   Europe, distinctive
               chocolate-coloured, high-quality flint was transported from quarry sites in the
               Holy Cross Mountains of Poland over distance of up to 400 km (250 miles).
                 The raw materials used to make ornaments and other items of dress and
               display travelled the greatest distances. Since such ornaments are absent prior
               to 40,000 years     ago these distances are particularly significant. Marine and
               fossil   shells   used for ornaments are commonly found several hundred
               kilometres from their source, while fossil amber was traded from the Black Sea
               to sites up to 700    km (430 miles) away, on the central Russian plain. 21
                  Although       basic   raw materials     in   the    Upper   Palaeolithic   were   still

               predominantly traded locally, the long distances increasingly covered indicate a
               far more complex and widespread system of contact than almost anything in

               operation prior to 40,000 years ago.



               Artifact and art styles

               Widespread distribution is not confined to raw materials. Distinctive styles of
               art and artifacts could also be diffused over large areas, and these styles - when

               well dated - can provide an indicator of the scale of the social system concerned.
               As we will see, an increase in scale occurred in the geographical range of artistic
               style after 40,000 years ago, which is best understood as a new link between

               people and the land. And this link in turn arose as a consequence of those all-
               important changes in symbolic behaviour that                now influenced the shape,
               treatment and choice of objects.
                  In the period 60,000-40,000 years ago, we find distinctive projectile points
               with a wide regional distribution. These include the Aterian points of North
               Africa and the leaf points of northern and southeast                   Europe which we




208
                                                               CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES]



encountered in Chapter 7. Among other such artifacts number the triangular
hand axes of northwest Europe and perhaps the Lupemban picks of eastern and
southern Africa (see figs. 48 and 49). However, these styles represent only very
broad categories: considerable variation exists within each group, often over
fairly short distances. For instance, Philip Allsworth-Jones has conducted an

exhaustive analysis of the leaf points of Europe which demonstrates just how
variable they are in terms of their dimensions, technique of manufacture,
degree of retouch, and their associated flint assemblage. 22
     In contrast, stylistic forms during the early Upper Palaeolithic tended to be
much more uniform. The split-base bone points of the Aurignacian, for
example, are essentially alike throughout their European distribution, and
many Gravettian stone artifacts display a similar homogeneity. A good example
is   provided by the shouldered projectile points dating to 23,000-21,000 years
ago from Kostenki, Spadzista Street in Cracow and Willendorf on the banks of
the Danube in lower Austria. While variation still exists, there is undoubtedly
more standardization over these       large distances.   The uniformity further
increased after the last glacial     maximum about       18,000 years ago     when
population densities rose throughout this very broad            territory,   and   is

particularlymarked for organic artifacts such as the antler sleeves (which
served as mounts for flint gouges): these were scattered all the way between
Poland and southern France in the late glacial.
  The wider geographical spread of characteristic artifact types was also
matched by the diffusion of art. To start with, the early Upper Palaeolithic in
Europe was marked by regional styles, such as the small groups of animal and
anthropomorphic carvings from southern Germany. As the climate begins the
long drop to its nadir at 18,000 years ago, however, we find the first pan-
                                                                                        80 Shouldered
continental art style: the so-called   Venus figurines. 23 Although similar in
                                                                                        projectile points
overall design, a closer study of these figurines reveals some differences. The         from a. Cracow;
limestone figure from Willendorf, for instance, was covered in red ochre and            b.   Avdeevo, Russia;
                                                                                        and c. Willendorf.
has finely engraved bracelets on her wrists (pi. 91), whereas one of the Kostenki
I/i figurines was made of ivory,    and had details of a necklace carved on her
chest. Another fragmentary chalk figurine has a head decorated like the surface
of a golf ball. Other figurines depict facial features in a rudimentary fashion.
     Here, evidently, is a vibrant tradition. Yet for all the local differences in
detailand treatment, this group of figurines (dated to between 23,000 and
21,000 years ago) shares a striking similarity in design and style. Recently, the
Russian archaeologist Maria Gvozdover has undertaken a detailed analysis of
the rich collections of Venus figurines from the neighbouring (in Russian
terms) sites of Kostenki I/i and Avdeevo. 24 She concludes that the decorative
variety   is   linked to a female symbolism    common throughout the Upper
Palaeolithic at the time.   A wide-ranging tradition thus existed which, in her
words, 'transcends the bounds of the individual archaeological cultures' where
these small figurines were found. Gvozdover very importantly argues, on the
basis of the archaeological contexts in which these objects were recovered, that
the variation reflected the multiplicity of roles for the female image.




                                                                                                        209
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES:




               81    The distribution of 'Venus' figurines and bas-relief carvings.




               Style and survival
               In order to understand the stylistic similarities of Upper Palaeolithic art and
               artifacts, we must first appreciate how people use material culture to survive in

               harsh, unpredictable environments.                 One route to survival is obviously by
               improving technology, particularly houses and clothing. Another is to fine-
               tune hunting equipment to minimize the chances of failure when scarce prey is
               encountered. But these advances are inadequate by themselves if they are not
               backed up by social networks - alliances between relatives, trading partners,
               friends, peers and task groups. As we saw in Chapter 7, these alliances act as
               'insurance policies' in habitats (such as today's Arctic) where the only certainty
               is   that resources will sometimes fail.
                    We believe that these social and trading networks were only established by
               the    Moderns. There are two major reasons for this. First, the objects that
               symbolize such alliances (i.e. the figurines and ornaments that seem to have no
               immediate utilitarian function), appeared only after 40,000 years ago. Second,
               populations after this time were apparently better equipped to survive
               worsening climates, suggesting the existence of social 'insurance policies' (in
               marked contrast to the Ancients who tended to become locally extinct during
               particularly harsh conditions). As a result, there was a reduction in the ebb and
               flow of settlement within regions under environmental stress.




210
                                                                  CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES



  Let us expand on these two themes. Style, the means by which objects are
made distinctive, is a fundamental trait of modern human behaviour, especially
when it is applied to objects of social value (such as necklaces and figurines)
rather than to functional items (e.g. points and hand axes) alone. Through
style, therefore, material culture can be used as a means of transmitting

information in a visual manner. So, using the Venus figurines as an example,
how can style assist social alliances? Well, art is a form of visual communication.
Style can aid social communication and cooperation because distant relatives
and strangers, individuals and groups identify with each other through sharing
a common, recognizable symbolism. The vital meetings that took place
between low-density populations on the steppe tundra of Ice Age Europe
would have been infrequent and unpredictable, but they were a key to long-
term survival. Having a shared material culture would have facilitated a
successful outcome to such meetings.
  The messages an 'art' object carries depends for their full interpretation on
the contexts and rituals in which the object is used. Unfortunately we will never
fully understand the particular messages denoted by Palaeolithic objects. But

while we cannot specify how Venus figurines were used, or why females were
always carved, or even     why some of them show consistent, exaggerated
proportions (all elements which define them as part of a stylistic, geographical
group), their distribution and dating clearly point to their function in allowing
people to navigate their way through critical negotiations. We believe it is no
coincidence that the figurines appeared in central and eastern Europe at a time
when climates were deteriorating and food resources dwindling, as the ice
sheets   expanded towards their maximum extent. 25 For without the social
alliances   which such objects symbolize, these areas would have been
unoccupied during the period 23,000-21,000 years ago.


Patterns of settlement

Another way to test the contribution made by art and other forms of material
culture to the expansion of human communities          is   to   examine settlement
distribution. Consider, for instance, the settlement history of a particularly
harsh region of Ice Age Europe: Germany. The Middle Palaeolithic sites were
abandoned during severe climatic phases whereas settlements during the early
Upper Palaeolithic survived somewhat longer; and occupation only ceased
during the harshest periods of the last glacial maximum.
  The evidence we reviewed in Chapter 7 suggested that during the Middle
Palaeolithic the Ancients achieved subsistence security by forming small, self-
sufficient local units. It was rare for individuals or small task groups to operate

                                      of time away from the local range in
at any great distance or for any length

which most of the population was concentrated.
  The environment continued to exert a stong influence on settlement during
the Upper Palaeolithic. The use of the German region was probably specialized
and infrequent during the early Upper Palaeolithic. It is unlikely, for example,




                                                                                              211
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               that any winter villages existed in this area. The archaeological traces are most
               probably those of small task groups visiting the region as part of their most
               distant reconnoitres from their home bases. These trips may have taken place
               during weak ameliorations in the Ice Age climate that lasted a few decades in
               most centuries.
                 So, as the Upper Palaeolithic demonstrates, a presence in a climatically
               severe region like Germany - as the ice sheets crept out from the north and
               south   - depended as much on the ability to create very extensive social
               networks as it did on improvements in technology. After all, you can have the
               best-sewn skin and fur clothing, but without the social networks to back you up
               survival     will   be   brief.    It   is   worth remembering that the Neanderthals
               disappeared under similar conditions. Their reaction to environmental decline
               was not to intensify their self-help networks but instead to relocate to areas
               where the resources could still support existing life-styles at more favourable
               population densities.



               Society and stone tools

               We can draw two conclusions from the foregoing comparison of the changing
               use of the landscape. In the first place Neanderthals had much smaller societies
               than any Moderns who later came to use their habitats. To ensure biological
               reproduction there would have had to be a mating network of 175 to 500
               people. 26 But beyond this biological limit Neanderthals seemingly showed little
               interest in establishing social ties.           Group self-sufficiency in all things (food,
               mates, raw materials) was their basic strategy rather than using the alliances
               that could be built, through negotiation, to extend the length of occupation in a
               region now subject to difficult climatic conditions.
                 Our second conclusion is that the Neanderthals were essentially hominids
               assisted in their survival by tools. Their material culture, dominated by stone

               artifacts,was not symbolically organized. They did not have culture in the
               sense  we understand it today and recognize it over the last 40,000 years.
               Artifacts may have been manufactured according to the same prototypes, but
               we doubt that style as defined above played much if any part in determining
               these shapes.       Middle        Palaeolithic    hand axes and scrapers     are certainly
               repetitive, but then so too are the elaborately constructed nests of birds. Just as
               birds are assisted in their survival by the nests they build, so too, we argue, were
               Neanderthals as tool-assisted hominids.
                 How can we be so sure of these two conclusions? On the one hand there is the
               long-term evidence for the ebb and flow of Middle Palaeolithic populations,
               especially as the climatic cycles ran their repetitive course in northern Europe.
               The distribution of Neanderthals appears to be environmentally determined:
               when faced with a climatic challenge they do not intensify, as the Moderns did,
               but instead disappear from the record until better times returned.
                 On the other hand there is the fundamental development, the creative
               explosion, of style as a means of shaping material culture. Style in this context is




212
                                                                             CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES:



                  ANCIENTS                                   MODERNS



                                    450000 km




               50000 km




      "V Regional breeding group                      \« Style boundary
      /^ Local group area                             y     Shell exchange network

           Local stone source                               Quarry
                                                      y Stone exchange network
                                                        x




82 The social revolution. The main difference between the societies of the Ancients (including the
Neanderthals) and the Moderns was one of scale and complexity. We interpret the archaeological
evidence for increasingly far-flung exchange and social interaction as an indication that the
emphasis of survival shifted from local self-sufficiency among the Ancients to a system of storage
based on social ties and alliances, thus reducing the risk of starvation. With this leap in scale came
the opportunity to expand territories and acquire raw materials over much greater distances.
Colonization could then proceed rapidly as, perhaps unintentionally, social solutions were found to
survival problems in the environment.


an expression of a more complicated social life. The messages it helps transmit
gather their meaning from society, the relationships between people and the
many different contexts where these are constructed. The Ancients, as tool-
assisted hominids, clearly had societies but these were not as complicated as
those of the Moderns since the former did not deal with people who were
socially or spatially distant.          As a result the Ancients never took out those
'insurance policies'. Consequently they did not cross the oceans or colonize the
inhospitable interiors of continental Asia. This is why the Ancients remained
Old World hominids.
   Their lack of art is now understandable. There was no need for it to assist in
ceremonies and negotiations. Equally, there may not have been the need for
complex language. Their geographically small, self-sufficient societies did not
need to further elaborate their social communication by visual means. Their
use of raw materials is also entirely consistent with the local level of their
existence.   Why bother with distant imports when a serviceable local stone will
probably do, especially since one of the reasons for using exotic stone is the ties
that come with it? But all of this only makes sense if we begin to see that the
fundamental difference between the Ancients and Moderns is social.                              The
answer to our earlier question - did the Neanderthals have culture? - is now
becoming clearer.




                                                                                                         213
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?




                    83 Around the world in 40,000 years. Very approximate dates offirst settlement by anatomically modern




               EXPANSION INTO NEW HABITATS
               The final level of comparison provides a further opportunity to examine our
               case for replacement. One of the most distinctive aspects of modern humanity
               is   the near global distribution of our species,            which was achieved during
               prehistory. 27 For many years this was put down either to chance (given enough
               time everywhere will be settled eventually) or the fortunate invention of
               appropriate technology (such as boats). Neither of these explanations are
               satisfactory in the light of the pattern and timing of global colonization after

               40,000 years ago. Charting this process has been one of the great achievements
               of contemporary archaeology. With the benefit of hindsight we can look back
               into the Palaeolithic and see more clearly the constraints on the Ancients which




214
                                                                                         CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?




humans are indicated (in years before the present) for those regions where there is sufficient evidence.




           resulted in their comparatively restricted Old World distribution. Once again
           the differences between the Ancients and Moderns - in terms of how rapidly
           and how many of the habitable parts of the earth they colonized - are too great
           for any model of continuity to be able reasonably to explain.
              We can trace the consequences of having smaller societies throughout the
           Ancients' world. It was, in terms of hominid colonization, half a million years
           or more of inaction. The exit from sub-Saharan Africa just before                          i    million
           years ago saw a fairly rapid colonization of many parts of the Old World.
           During      this   first   African dispersal, however, several environments and
           landforms remained unsettled.               Among these were islands and mountain
           chains, the large sand deserts and tropical rain forests, and the Siberian boreal
           forests. Perhaps this was partly due to the severe continental climates where -




                                                                                                                     215
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               even today, in an interglacial - the winter temperatures drop off the scale. But
               more significant is the uncertainty of food in such environments. It is possible
               to make a living, as the fisher-gatherer-hunters of Siberia and the Canadian
               sub-Arctic still do today; but their low population densities indicate just how
               difficult this is. Survival in these environments requires forward planning and

               the intricate scheduling of time and labour to catch fish and deer, and gather
               berries and plant foods. Inhabitants of such environments, as we have
               discussed, also need social networks to back up the periodic disasters. The
               absence of Ancients in eastern Siberia points very clearly to the mismatch
               between the food resources in that environment and the Ancients' society.
               Food was always available in these habitats, it was simply high-risk to exploit.
               This suggests that the barriers to colonization were determined primarily by
               the nature of the Ancients themselves, and not by the environment.


               The colonization of Australia and the Americas
               The surge of colonization achieved by the Moderns is quite remarkable. They
               crossed the     Sunda trench to Australia and settled an unfamiliar continent
               inhabited by marsupials. The earliest dates range from possibly 55,000 years
               ago in the Malakunanja rockshelter in the northern territory, to 35,000 years
               ago at Warreen cave in southwest Tasmania. Recent work by Chris Gosden,
               Jim Allen and Matthew Spriggs in the Bismarck archipelago and Solomon
               islands on the western rim of the Pacific has shown that by 32,000 years ago
               people were making substantial ocean voyages. 28 The stone tools from
               excavations such as Matenkupkum on New Ireland are typologically
               amorphous and reminiscent of the Middle Palaeolithic. But we have already
               seen how unsatisfactory stone tools can be as a measure of modernity;
               colonization is a much better guide to fundamental changes in behaviour than
               stone tool typology and technology.
                 It is not until the Moderns appear that evidence is forthcoming for entry into

               the Americas, the timing of which is still hotly contested.         We favour a late
               arrival,around 15,000 years ago, but a vociferous camp would more than
               double that figure. There are no serious suggestions, however, that any people
               but the Moderns crossed the Bering land bridge into North America. All these
               great bursts of colonization led eventually to the occupation of most of the
               continents and major islands in prehistory. Indeed,             when the world was
               rediscovered by European explorers in the last 500 years, the only attractive
               lands they found uninhabited were remote areas such as some of the islands in
               the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. They had been beaten to it for the most part by
               the prehistoric Moderns. On the continents, the only vacant regions were above
               the permanent snowline.



               Did they have culture? Could they speak?
               Earlier    in   this   chapter   we   characterized   the   Ancients,   including   the
               Neanderthals, as tool-assisted hominids. Technology was one of the varied




216
                                                                       CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



strategies adopted to solve the problems of survival. Artifacts and                weapons,
campsites and landscapes were never elaborated in the cultural ways that are so
basic to any definition of what makes a modern human modern.
  But for all their differences from us, it would be a mistake to write off the
Ancients and particularly the Neanderthals in that period from 60,000 to
40,000 years ago. They did not do what Moderns did, but they were around for
a long time and, but for the appearance of the Moderns, they would probably

still   be around today. They were not failures merely because they had no art
and never visited the Great Barrier Reef. As we saw in Chapter 7, recent work
on the organization of their stone technologies by Steven Kuhn has indicated
diversity within uniformity.           A narrow stereotype of the Neanderthals (or
indeed any other regional population of Ancients) is clearly an unwarranted
simplification. The Ancients existed within quite a different social order from
our own, with only limited planning depth and organization. But this does not
mean they were capable only of a single form of behaviour, found throughout
the     Old World, and modified exclusively by changes in the availability of
animal and plant species.
   Culture is a difficult word. Some have seen it as an archaeological grail, its
investigation forming the focus of the discipline. Culture has been declared the
means of human adaptation as well as the resource for demonstrating human
diversity unrelated to mechanical survival. It looms large in any definition of
what is, and what is not, modern. In a recent paper linking the first spoken
languages with the appearance of art Iain Davidson and William Noble come to
this conclusion: 'There can be no such thing as culture without language and

the socially determined sharing of meaning and value. It will therefore be
misleading to talk of culture for any hominids before fully modern humans.' 29
   We feel, however, that while spoken language adds incalculably to the
elaboration of culture we should avoid pinning all definitions of modernity on
one element, however significant it may seem to us. To do so is to run the risk
either of simply fulfilling our initial assumptions or of failing to supply an
adequately reasoned explanation for the major differences between the
Ancients and the Moderns. The Neanderthal and Modern debate is very much
a parable     about insiders and outsiders in the modern world, those who are
savage and those who are civilized. 30
   We examined in Chapter 4 the anatomical evidence for Neanderthal voice
boxes. They could certainly communicate, as can all social animals, and they no
doubt spoke,         albeit   simply    and probably slowly.        We argue that the
Neanderthals lacked complex spoken language because they did not need it.
We could not imagine life without           it,   but they did not have the social life to
require     it.   Robert Whallon takes the view that language             itself   gradually
evolved, rather than emerged fully formed. 31 He points out in particular that
the part of language to develop last was probably the element (known as the
tense-modality aspect) that refers to the future. This only appeared in the
context of colonization, for long-term planning and extended social networks
were needed to reduce the risks involved in migration and survival.




                                                                                                   217
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               Where did modern behaviour originate?
               Archaeology often likes to deal with questions of origin. Where did agriculture
               first evolve?   Why did cities first appear in the Middle East? Where is the cradle
               for the origins of humankind?
                 We believe that the geographical origins of anatomically modern humans lie
               somewhere in Africa. We can be less certain about the source of modern
               behaviour. The time-lag between the earliest modern-looking humans in East
               Africa (Omo Kibish perhaps as much as 130,000 years old) and the Middle East
               (Qafzeh, Skhul       f.   100,000 years old), and the appearance of Moderns in
               Australia (c. 55,000 years ago?) plus the symbolic explosion in art and burials
               after 40,000 years ago makes it difficult to point to any one area as the centre.
               Perhaps the early dates from Australia suggest some region in Southeast Asia;
               early Moderns may have evolved cultural behaviour here which then - on the
               timescale of human evolution - quickly sped around the world. The Middle
               East (regarded by many as a crossroads) may also have been such a centre,
               exporting behaviour to existing populations of Moderns in the east and, as the
               Moderns themselves spread to the west, into continents such as Europe.
                 The source of modern behaviour will remain conjectural until we have a
               better understanding of which evolutionary forces and mechanisms actually
               shaped modern behaviour. What is quite clear, however, is that wherever new
               developments took place they did so rapidly (the flick of a switch), adapting to
               the anatomy of modern humans that had been around for perhaps 70,000 years.
               Such behaviour, based on the structural principles of symbolically organized
               culture, spread rather like a virus among the host population, and then spread
               further as the host itself now expanded. The rapidity of the process, which took
               place so many thousands of years ago, makes it difficult for archaeologists to
               study. But - like the remnant ripples of radiation that recently confirmed the
               Big Bang theory of the origins of the Universe without indicating exactly where
               ithappened - we believe that the global expansion of humans which began
               some 60,000-40,000 years ago is evidence of replacement and not continuity as
               the mechanism of the human revolution.




                       Epilogue: The Lesson for Human Unity


               Let us return once more to the question we posed at the beginning of the book:
               how can we best explain the evidence for human evolution? We hope that we
               have demonstrated convincingly that population replacement            is   the   most
               plausible interpretation of the archaeological and anthropological record of the
               later Pleistocene.        Our study has focused in particular on the differences
               between the Neanderthals and modern humans, and we determined that the




218
                                                          epilogue: the lesson for human unity



fundamental differences between the two populations lay in their society and
culture as well as in their anatomy.        We found that the two communities were
supported by different capacities for communication - verbal, visual and
symbolic - and that this in turn affected their organization of campsites, their
exploitation of the landscape, and their colonization of new habitats. But to
conclude that the Neanderthals were different from us is not to condemn them
in the   same way that earlier popularizers and scientists did. Our model of
replacement does not carry the moral implications of, say, Boule's theories, nor
the negative judgment implicit in the quotations opening this chapter from
H.G. Wells and the Quennells. The Neanderthals were not ape-men, nor
missing links - they were as human as us, but they represented a different brand
of humanity,       one with a distinctive blend of primitive and advanced
characteristics.   There was nothing          inevitable about the      triumph of the
Moderns, and a twist of Pleistocene fate could have left the Neanderthals
occupying Europe to this day. The 30,000 years by which we have missed them
represent only a few ticks of the Ice Age clock.
  Multiregionalists are often all too quick to attack studies such as this for
being unscientific and contrary to the spirit of the times. Milford Wolpoff, for
instance, has written:

   The spread of humankind and its differentiation into distinct geographic
   groups that persisted through long periods of time, with evidence of long-
   lasting   contact and cooperation,         in   many ways   is   a   more   satisfying
   interpretation of human prehistory than a scientific rendering of the story of
   Cain, based on one population quickly, and completely, and most likely
   violently,   replacing   all   others.   This rendering of modern population
   dispersals is a story of 'making war and not love', and if true its implications
   are not pleasant. 32

Thus according to Wolpoff, it is preferable to include than to exclude, to speak
of differences simply as variation rather than to attempt to understand them or
their significance.
  We, on the other hand, feel that it is pointless to seek winners or losers in the
story of human evolution, for each age will place its own gloss on history.
Rather, we should accept that differences exist, and use them to broaden our
definitions and discussions of humanity. For although the Neanderthals were,
quite simply, 'not us', they - or rather their African kin - provided the basis
from which we sprang; both they and the early Moderns have a place in our
prehistory, whether or not they were our actual lineal ancestors. Many before
us have dropped an impenetrable curtain between the Neanderthals and the
Moderns. But we believe that, if a curtain exists at all, it 'has no near or far side,
only a highly patterned warp and weft stemming from the rich potential of
culture,   however simple or complex, volatile or repetitive.' 33 In conclusion,
therefore, we would urge an investigation of the curtain itself, for we should
celebrate our rich and varied prehistory as a route to enhancing, in these multi-
cultural times, our understanding of ourselves.




                                                                                            219
                                                                                   1                             A
                                                                                                                 1




                                     Appendix: Selected Absolute Dates




                        Dating                                             Date               SD±
Site/Region             method       Hominids   Archaeology                (ooos years ago)   (ooos)   Comments            Source


Mumba Ca\c              14C                                                  26.9                      Bed 111             Clark 1988

   Africa
Batho Kiro              14C                     Early Upper Palaeolithic     20.                       Layer 6a/7          Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Mumba Cave              14C                     MSA                        5*3°                                            Clark 1988
   Africa
Nunamira Cave           14c                     Flakes and Cores             30-4             0.69     Unit 1 1/2          Cosgrovc ct al 1990
   Australia

ORS 7                   14C                     Flakes and Cores             30.8                      Layer 3             Cosgrovc ct al 1990
   Australia


STAGE 2/3 BOUNDARY 32,000 years ago BP
St Ccsairc              TL                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     321                       Layer 6             Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     323                       BaseC               Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Bacho Kiro              4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     32-7                      Layer 6b            Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     33 3                      Lower C             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Matcnkupkum             4C                      Flakes and Cores             33                        Layer 7             Allen ct al. 1988

   Pacific

Boker A                 4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic    '33-4                                          Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Boker A                 4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic    •33-6                                          Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     33-9                      MidC                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     34               0.4      MidC                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Moustcrian                   34 1             075      E2BE    1 1   6-3   BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
Border Cave             ESR                     MSA 3                       34S7                       Unit 2BS            Grim ct al 1990
   Africa
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     34 5                      Lower C             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Boker Tachtit           4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic    •35                        Level 4             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     35 4                      Lower C             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Gcisscnklostcrlc Cave   4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     36                        lib                 Hahn 1982
   Europe
St Ccsairc              TL                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     36-3                      Layer 8             Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
El Castillo             4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     37-7                      l8b2                Cabrera Valdcs & Bischoff 1989
   Europe
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     37-7                      E2BE111-1           BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
L'Arbreda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     37-7                      E2BE111-2           BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
Boker A                 4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     37 9                                          Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
St Ccsairc              TL                      Moustcrian [Denticulate]     382                       Layer 1             Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
EI Castillo             4C [AMS]                Early Upper Palaeolithic     38.5                      iSbi                Cabrera Valdcs & Bischoff 1989
   Europe
Sclayn Cave             4C                      Moustcrian                   386                       Level 1             Huxtablc 1988
   Europe
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     387                       E2BE111-4           BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
Douara                  4C                      Moustcrian                   389                       Top IVB             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Combe Grcnal            4C                      Moustcrian [Denticulate]     39                        12                  Bowman & Sicvcking 1983
   Europe
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Moustcrian                   39-4                      E2BE116-1           Bischoff ct al 1989
   Europe
L'Arbreda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     39-9                      E2BE    1 1   1-3   Bischoff ct al 1989
   Europe
Abric Romani            U   scries              Moustcrian                  39-6o                                          Bischoff ct al 1989
   Europe
Midhishi 2              TL & 14C                MSA                          40-70                                         Clark 1988
   Africa




                                                                                                                                                     221
                                                                                                                   A1




appendix: selected radiocarbon dates



                  Dating                                                    Date               SD±
 Site/Region      method         Hominids        Archaeology                (000s years ago)   (000s)   Comments                 Source


El Castillo       i
                      4 C[AMS]                   Early Upper Palaeolithic     4°               2.1      18c                      Cabrera Valdes & Bischoff 1989
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL             Neanderthal     Moustcrian [Typical]         403              2.6      J                        Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             None                         40.9                      I                        Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
St Ccsairc        TL                             Moustcrian [Denticulate]     40.9             2-5      Layer 10                 Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
L'Arbrcda         14C [AMS]                      Mousterian                   41.4             1.6      E2BE116-3                Bischoff ct al 1989

   Europe
Amud              ESR            Neanderthal     ?Moustcrian                  4i 5                      Layer B                  Griin and Stringer 1991

   Middle East
St Ccsairc        TL                             Moustcrian [Denticulate]     424              4.8      Layer 12                 Mcrcier ct al 1991
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             Moustcrian [MTA B]           42-5                      H2-H9                    Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
Lc Mousticr       ESR                            Moustcrian [MTA B]          397-41                     H                        Mcllars and Grun 1991
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             Mousterian                   42.6             3-7      K                        Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
Border Cave       ESR                            Howicsons Poort              42-59                     Unit 3BS                 Griin ct al 1990
   Africa

Border Cave       ESR            early Modern    Howicsons Poort              42-64                     Unit 3WA                 Griin ct al 1990
   Africa

Bacho Kiro        .
                      4c         PModcrn         Early Upper Palaeolithic   >43                         Layer 1                  Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Douara            .+C                            Moustcrian                 >43                         Mid IVB                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Douara            14C                            Moustcrian                 >43-2                       Mid IVB                  Bar-Y'oscf 1989

   Middle East
Douara            14C                            Mousterian                 >43-2                       Lower IVB                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Ksar Akil         14C                            Moustcrian                   433              1.2                               Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Ksar Akil         14C                            Moustcrian                   43-7             i-5      B?                       Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Combe Grenal      TL                             Moustcrian [Denticulate]     44               4        20                       Bowman & Sio eking 1983
   Europe
Sclav n Cave      TL                             Mousterian                   44               5-5      Level 1                  Huxtablc 1988
   Europe
Guattari          ESR            Neanderthal     Moustcrian [Pontinian]       44-5^2                    Surface deposit          Griin and Stringer 1991
   Europe                                                                                                    including cranium
Guattari          ESR                            Moustcrian [Pontinian]       4454                      Gi                       Grun and Stringer 1991
   Europe
Banyolas          U scries       Neanderthal                                  45               4        Matrix                   Julia and Bischoff 1991

   Europe
Bokcr Tachtit     I4 c                           Early Upper Palaeolithic   2*45-5                      Level 1                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Malakunanja II    TL                             Flakes and Cores             46               9        2.3m depth               Roberts ct al 1990
   Australia

Lc Mousticr       TL                             Mousterian [MTA B]           463              3        Hi                       Valladas ct al 1986
   Europe
Bokcr Tachtit     14C                            Early Upper Palaeolithic     46.9             2-4      Level 1                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar          14C            .'Neanderthal   Moustcrian                   46.9             '5       Layer D                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Bokcr Tachtit     I4   c                         Early Upper Palaeolithic     47-2             9        Level 1                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
La Chapcllc       ESR            Neanderthal     Moustcrian [Quina]           475(>                     Bed    1                 Griin and Stringer 1991
   Europe
Bacho Kiro        14C                            Moustcrian [Typical]       >47 5                       Layer 13                 Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Border Cave       ESR                            MSA 3                        47-53                     Unit 2VVA                Griin ct al 1990
   Africa
loton             TL                             Moustcrian [Quina]           48               3                                 Valladas ct al 1987
   Europe
Amud              ESR            Neanderthal     -Moustcrian                  49-5             4        Layer B                  Grun and Stringer 1991
   Middle East
Fonscigncr        TL                             Moustcrian [MT A]            50.2             53       Level      D upper       Valladas ct al 1987
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             Moustcrian [MTA A]           503              5-5      G4                       Valladas ct al 1986
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       ESR                            Moustcrian [MTA A]           43 47                     G                        Mcllars and Griin 1991
   Europe
Shanidar          14C            .'Neanderthal   Moustcrian                   S06              3        Layer      D             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Guattari          U scries        Neanderthal    Moustcrian [Pontinian]       51               3        Layer Go                 Griin and Stringer 1991
   Europe
 Malakunanja II   TL                             Flakes and Cores             52               11                                Roberts ct al 1990
   Australia
 Douara           14C                            Moustcrian                 >5*                         Lower IVB                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
 Ras cl Kclb      >4C                            Moustcrian                 >52                         B                        Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
 Fonscigncr       TL                             Moustcrian [Typical]         52.8             5-5      Level      D middle      Valladas ct al 1987
   Europe




222
                                                                                                                                                                  |




                                                                                              appendix: selected radiocarbon dates



                      Dating                                                    Date               SD±
Site/Region           method          Hominids         Archaeology                    years ago)
                                                                                (000s yea          (000s)   Comments                 Source


Douara                ,
                          4c                           Moustcrian               >S3«                        1MB                      Bar-Yoscf 1989
