                                                                                                           sapiens)




                  28 Diagram illustrating one of many possible interpretations of human evolution over the last
                  four million years. According to this view, the human family tree consists offour adaptive
                  radiations: the australopithecines, paranthropines, early    Homo and later Homo. The use of the
                  term 'archaic Homo sapiens' is currently in some doubt.



                  How many early humans are there?
                  Many researchers now feel that there is not just one kind of Homo habilis.
                  Instead there seems to have been a large- and a small-bodied species, the large
                  one represented by fossils such as the skull known as ER-1470 (East Rudolf,
                  now East Turkana, specimen number 1470), and the small one by fossils such
                                                4
                  as the ER-1813 skull.             Both types can be clearly distinguished from both the
                  australopithecenes and from the subsequent species of Homo erectus. However,
                  it is   not at all clear which one should be regarded as the 'real' Homo habilis and
                  which one needs a new species name. Several names have been suggested,
                  among them Homo ergaster or 'work man', and Homo rudolfensis. It is also
                  unclear from where these early humans first evolved, and which of the species,
                  if either,   was the ancestor of Homo erectus.
                     While some of these early humans had brains no larger than australopithe-
                  cines, the skull shape as a whole was somewhat longer, with signs in some
                  specimens of a stronger brow ridge and a more angular back to the skull. These
                  features clearly foreshadow the skull form of Homo erectus. In addition the face,
                  while still large and transversely flat, was tucked under the skull to a greater
                  extent, and some fossils show a more projecting nasal region - a proper nose - as
                  in later humans.

                    There is some dispute about what the rest of the body was like in the earliest
                  humans. There are leg bones and a hip bone from Koobi Fora which are large




62
                                                                        NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


enough to have come from a Homo erectus skeleton, but which are more likely to
derive from the same large-bodied habilis population as ER-1470. Of about the
same antiquity, 1.8 million years, is a tiny skeleton from Olduvai - Olduvai
Hominid (OH) 62 - which resembles that of the well-known australopithecine
'Lucy', found in Ethiopia,         which   is   over one million years older.   The
                                                     OH 62, barely over
resemblance is not only in the small estimated stature of                           1


m, but in the non-human limb proportions. Like Lucy, OH 62 has long arms
and short legs, but has been assigned to Homo habilis on the basis of its jaws and
         5
teeth.

  So, both above and below the neck, there is now ample evidence that more
than one species of early human must have existed in East Africa between 2 and
1.5 million years ago,      and also that they lived alongside surviving robust
australopithecines of the species Paranthropus boisei. Known as the 'near man
of Boise', after a benefactor of the Leakeys, the best-known example was
discovered at Olduvai by Mary Leakey in 1959. Moreover, there was a habilis-
like species in South Africa, whichmay be related to the East African forms.
And here too there is evidence of coexistence with robust australopithecines,
this time of the species Paranthropus robustus.




Enter Homo erectus

But as Homo habilis, in its various specific guises, faded from the scene by 1.5
million years ago in East Africa, a new kind of hominid was already present, one
whose membership of the genus Homo is not subject to any of the doubts which
still pervade the earlier fossil material. This new kind of hominid was either the

earliest form of the species     Homo erectus, or a more primitive ancestral form
which requires a new species name. Some workers, such as Bernard Wood,
prefer to call this hominid Homo ergaster. b But to keep this account as simple as
possible,    we will refer to this particular early East Africa material as 'early'
Homo erectus, as long as the reader bears in mind that the important issue of
classification is by no means resolved.

  The early Kenyan Homo erectus is represented by a nearly complete skull
(ER-3733), a braincase (ER-3883), jaws and jaw fragments (e.g. ER-992, for
which the species name H. ergaster was given7 ), and several bones from the rest
of the skeleton. Some of this material may be as old as 1.8 million years, thus
overlapping with Homo habilis specimens as well as Paranthropus.
  By far the most spectacular find has come from the west side of Lake
Turkana in Kenya. This was a chance discovery in 1985 by a member of
Richard Leakey's field team, following the recognition of a small fragment of
skull as     human. Careful searching and sieving, followed by a controlled
excavation, eventually revealed the   most complete skeleton of an ancient
hominid over 1 million years old yet discovered. The skeleton, dated at 1.6
million years, belonged to a boy of about 1 1 years old, who was already c. 1 .62   m
(5 ft 4 in) tall.   The find dispelled the notion that all Homo erectus individuals
were short and stocky, since this West Turkana boy (WT-15000) was certainly




                                                                                            63
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              very muscular but also long-limbed, possessing similar body proportions to
              people living in East Africa today. 8 Still younger in date are finds from Olduvai
             Gorge, such as the braincase known as            OH 9 which   is about   1.2 million years
                    9
             old.



             Out of Africa 1 and regional developments
             Homo erectus continued to evolve in Africa during the middle Pleistocene,
             giving rise to later forms represented by fossils such as Bodo and Broken Hill
             (see       Chapter 6). However, Homo erectus is believed to have been the first
             hominid species to have spread from the original African homeland to the
             continent of Asia, and perhaps also Europe. The conventional wisdom is that
             this       occurred around      1    million years ago. But in 1989 a    human jaw was
             discovered from the site of Dmanisi in Georgia which could be as old as 1.6
             million years. 10 If this date is confirmed by further study, it would imply that
             Homo erectus had dispersed much earlier, and might even call into question
             whether erectus had actually originated in Africa. The Dmanisi find is
             particularly interesting in the light of recent claims for artifacts as old as 2
             million years in Pakistan. 11
                As we        shall   see,   for    some palaeoanthropologists -   particularly   those
             favouring regional continuity - this dispersal is the beginning of the process
             which culminated in the modern human races. By the time Homo erectus was
             established in the Far East, after 1 million years ago, the skull form had become
             significantly more robust than the early African examples. These more 'typical'
             Asian erectus populations had long and flattened skulls with heavy brow ridges,
             thick skull walls, and strong buttresses around the braincase (especially along
             the top, a sagittal ridge) and, across the back, an occipital ridge or torus. 12 A
             comparison of the early Homo erectus African skulls with late Asian erectus
             specimens from China and Java, over 1 million years younger, shows a 25 per
             cent increase in average brain size, as measured from the inside volume of the
             braincase (1150 ml compared with 850 ml). Whether the increase is entirely
             related to an increasing intelligence rather than some other factor, for example
             an increase in body size, is still uncertain. A larger body size could be due to
             changes in life-style, or adaptation to cooler environments with a correspond-
             ing increase in body weight. Certainly the little material we have from erectus
             skeletons throughout the Old World after the West Turkana boy suggests that
             these were very robustly built people with large joint surfaces and thick-walled
             limb bones. These fragmentary data lend some support to climatic adaptation
             as a possible explanation for a number of these changes.
                By 730,000 years ago, at the beginning of the middle Pleistocene (Chapter 2)
             - and perhaps earlier still according to the Dmanisi fossil and controversial
             archaeological evidence elsewhere 13 - Homo erectus had colonized the Middle
             East and southern Europe. But the earliest archaeological sites in the Mediter-
             ranean regions of Europe have yielded no fossil material.                The evidence is
             almost exclusively stone tools (see box pp. 56-57). We have to wait some 200,000




64
                                                                                      NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


high, domed skull                                                                            low, flat skull


                                                                                                                       angled occipital
                                                            strong                                                     bone
                                                            brow ridge
                                        small
                                        brow ridge                                                                        occipital
                                                                                                                          torus (ridge)




                                        chin                no chin
Homo sapiens                                                                                                       Homo erectus
(European Upper Palaeolithic)                                                                                                   (Java)
                                                                                                                   5 cm
                                                                                               1   1   1   1   1   j

2Q Skulls of a robust modern human from Kostenki (left) and a reconstruction o/Homo erectus
from Java, illustrating important differences between the two species: the earlier specimen features
a more prominent supraorbital torus, a lower more receding forehead, a highly angled occipital
bone, a greater facial projection, and lack of a chin.




years before our first view of the earliest Europeans, and even then the material
comes only from the northern regions of the continent. There is no secure
evidence that they reached more northerly areas such as Germany or peripheral
areas such as Britain until 500,000 years ago, at the earliest. By this time there is
some evidence that Homo erectus had evolved into a new species in the west
while maintaining the more typical erectus morphology in the Far East, as at
Zhoukoudian - the 'Peking Man' site - occupied episodically over the period
from more than 500,000 to 250,000 years ago, and at Ngandong (where the
Javanese 'Solo Man' was found), settled perhaps as late as 100,000 years ago.
   The western forms were developing subtly different braincase shapes;
several specimens possess a fully modern-sized brain and a less robust skull
architecture. These changes are thought by many scholars to signal the first
appearance of our own species, Homo sapiens, in an early form called 'archaic'
Homo sapiens. Others prefer to designate a species distinct from both erectus
and sapiens; they have called it Homo heidelbergensis after the Mauer lower jaw,
believed to be about 500,000 years old, found in a sand pit near Heidelberg in
        I4
1907.        Some of these changes in European skull morphology can be seen as
foreshadowing that of the Neanderthals, whose origins we will now discuss.



The origins of the Neanderthals
Most palaeoanthropologists accept                that   the   Neanderthals evolved from
European middle Pleistocene ancestors who were either a late form of Homo
erectus      or a   descendant of that species. 15 This would be either  Homo
heidelbergensis or 'archaic'       Homo sapiens. The development of many of the
features that later characterize the Neanderthal face, skull bones and mandible




                                                                                                                                      65
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              (Chapter 4) had certainly occurred by the end of the middle Pleistocene. The
              fossils from Biache-St-Vaast and the Abri Bourgeois-Delaunay (part of the La

              Chaise complex of caves in southern France) date from that period, more than
              125,000 years ago (table p. 47).
                Even more ancient, according to recent dating by uranium series and
             electron spin resonance, are the skull, jaw and other skeletal parts of several
             individuals - including at least one child - from the site of Ehringsdorf near
             Weimar in Germany. 16 A rich flora and fauna thrived in and around the warm
              springs of this region, and the well-preserved remains of plants, leaves, snails
             and large mammals have been recovered from the thick travertine (carbonate)
              deposits laid down by the springs, along with those of 'early' Neanderthals and
              their tools. Occupied about 230,000 years ago, it was presumably a prime site
              for game and plant foods even in the winters of a temperate stage (Chapter 2). If
              the Neanderthals did split from the lineage leading to modern humans, then the
             Ehringsdorf date of 230,000 years ago also gives a minimum age for the
              beginning of the separate lineage of modern people.
                Although the fragmentary Pontnewydd specimens from Wales (see box pp.
              58-59) are arguably even more securely dated at about the same age, 225,000
              years ago, as the Ehringsdorf fossils, they can only really be linked to the later
              Neanderthals by the common trait of molar taurodontism,             a   condition of
              unseparated tooth roots and expanded pulp cavities (Chapter 4).
                However, it is considered probable by several research workers that the
              origins of the Neanderthals lie even further back in the middle Pleistocene,
              amongst the populations represented by                found at Swanscombe
                                                               fossils

             (England), Steinheim (Germany), Arago and        Montmaurin (France), Ata-
             puerca (Spain) and Petralona (Greece). The status of the Swanscombe skull
             fragments has changed considerably from the time when the find was allied
             with the hypothetical ancient presapiens lineage leading exclusively to modern
             people (Chapter 1). These three parts of the back of a (probably female) skull,
             were found on separate occasions in 1935, 1936 and 1955, in a gravel pit in north
              Kent. Yet they fit together nearly perfectly (pi. 22). Thousands of flint hand
              axes have been found in the same levels (Chapter 7). The features of the cranial
              base and occipital torus are reminiscent of those of the Neanderthals, while the
              parietal bones are rather short and flat. Particularly important, there is a central
              depression in the occipital bone (the suprainiac fossa) which           is   present in
              Neanderthals generally.
                The Steinheim skull, found in a gravel pit near Stuttgart in 1933, is a more
              problematic specimen, with  a much smaller brain size than Swanscombe

              (estimated at 1100 ml, compared with Swanscombe's 1325 ml). The skull is
              rounder and thinner, but the forehead - not preserved in Swanscombe - is low
              and narrow, with a strong brow ridge (pis. 23, 24). The upper jaw is flat with a
              rather modern-looking and hollowed cheek region, but this might be partly due
              to the crushing and twisting which the skull underwent during fossilization. The

              back of the skull seems to show a suprainiac         fossa, like   Swanscombe.       Is

              Steinheim thus a very primitive Neanderthal,          its   differences from other




66
occipital
bone                                                            low frontal bone



                                                       strong
                                                       brow ridge




depression
(suprainiac fossa) v -

                                                                    tSfcf
                 Swanscombe                                                  Arago 21


                                                   strong
                                                  brow ridge


                                                                                                                angular
                                                                                                                occipital bone



                                                                                                                occipital torus
                                                                                                             (ridge)



rounded                                       hollowed                             inflated cheeks (no canine fossa)
occipital bone                                cheek
                                              (canine fossa)
                                                                             Petralona
                                                                                                         5 cm
                                                                                           l   I   i   J_l

jo European middle Pleistocene fossil hominids. The Swanscombe 'skull' has a hypothetical
reconstruction based on the Steinheim specimen.



Neanderthals accentuated by its small size and gracility (due to its female
gender), as well as its antiquity? This is a difficult question to answer, and it
partly depends on how we view the controversial Petralona cranium (see below).
   The large sample of fossil hominids from the Caune de l' Arago, Tautavel, in
southern       France    is   probably    more ancient than            the    specimens            from
Swanscombe, Steinheim and Pontnewydd, and is dated at about 400,000 years
old.
     17
        There are about 60 specimens. Many of these consist of fragmentary
dental and postcranial parts, but there is a nearly complete hip bone, two jaw
bones and the front, face and right side of a skull (pi. 20). The hip bone is
strongly built, and its robusticity is more like that of much earlier African Homo
erectus fossils than that of the Neanderthals. The jaw bones show a considerable
difference in size, probably reflecting differences in sex, with the larger one
resembling Homo erectus, and the smaller one Neanderthals. The partial skull
(Arago 21) is distorted, but has been reconstructed to display a considerable
facial projection, perhaps somewhat exaggerated. However, there are certainly

other 'primitive' features such as the very strong brow ridge, narrow frontal
and low brain size (probably less than 1200 ml). In these and other features -
the flat face, low broad nose and low orbits - the skull is like a larger version of
Steinheim, but the cheek bones are not hollowed and in this sense are more
Neanderthal-like. The right parietal bone is very like that of Swanscombe, but
with an especially thick area at the back, called an angular torus, often found on




                                                                                                                                  67
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


             Homo erectus skulls. Some workers actually prefer to classify the Arago skull as
             Homo erectus on the basis of the projecting face, small brain size, strong brows
             and angular torus, but the shape of the braincase is also reminiscent of fossils
             like Swanscombe, Steinheim and Petralona, which may be related to the

             ancestors of the Neanderthals.
                Other European sites which have produced comparable fossil remains from
             this period include Montmaurin (France) and Atapuerca (Spain).                The latter
             site has   yielded a large but fragmented sample of parts of skeletons of many
             different individuals, which probably date to over 200,000 years ago. 18 They
             were concentrated in a small chamber deep within a complex of caves, and it is
             still   unclear whether they represent the oldest known evidence of deliberate
             disposal of the dead by early humans or a secondary deposit derived from a
             carnivore     den or    a   natural   catastrophe.     Excavations are continuing        at
             Atapuerca, with the very recent discovery of two well-preserved                     skulls.

             Current estimates put the minimum number of individuals represented at 23,
             and the total number of bones or fragments at over 700.
                The most complete and informative of these middle Pleistocene fossils is the
             cranium from Petralona Cave in Greece. 19 Its exact age is still a matter of great
             controversy, and even its ownership has been the subject of long wrangles in the
             Greek      courts.   Although found        in   i960, a year after the cave itself was
             discovered by local villagers, the significance of the skull was not realized
             internationally until over a decade later. Initially described as a Neanderthal, it
             was     clear to Chris Stringer       on   first   viewing in 197 1 that in   its   unique
             combination of features it was unlike any Neanderthal skull he had ever seen. It
             reminded him strongly of the Broken Hill ('Rhodesian Man') skull with which
             he was familiar from his research at the Natural History Museum in London.
                The Petralona skull is very large and robust, with a thick angular occipital
             bone, carrying a centrally strong transverse torus (pis. 27-29). These occipital
             features are characteristic of the species Homo erectus, yet the overall shape of
             the skull is unlike that of erectus since the braincase is expanded higher up on
             the parietal region, and there is no angular torus at the back corner of the
             parietals. While the brow ridge is consistently thick, as in      Homo erectus, it has a
             double-arched shape above the orbits very like that of Neanderthals. The cheek
             bones are inflated rather than hollowed out and the nose                 is   also rather
             Neanderthal-like in size, although the nasal bones are less projecting. However,
             the middle of the face and nose are not pulled forward as in the Neanderthals.
             Instead, they are somewhat flatter and the large, upper face is also relatively
             broad compared with the narrower shape of Neanderthal skulls. It does not jut
             forward from the braincase, as also is the case in Neanderthals and modern
             humans. The brain volume was about 1,220 ml, at the overlap of the largest
             Homo erectus and smallest Neanderthal specimens, and the cast of the inside of
             the braincase is less narrow and flattened at the front than that of Homo erectus.
                The classification of the Petralona cranium is made difficult by its mosaic
             (mixed) morphology, but the combination of an erectus-\ike back to the skull
             and Neanderthal-like front suggests that Neanderthal characteristics were first




68
                                                                        NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


established in the facial region and brow ridge. However, the Steinheim skull
appears to tell a different story, for there the back of the skull looks more
Neanderthal-like than the front! It may be that the Steinheim face, which is
now distorted after being crushed in the sediments where it lay, was originally
more Neanderthal-like, or it may be that Neanderthal features did not evolve in
an orderly fashion and ancestral populations existed with different combi-
nations of features. It would help if we knew the relative ages of Petralona and
Steinheim, but we cannot say with any certainty which is the older, although we
suspect it   is   Petralona. It has even been suggested that the two could be
approximate contemporaries and represent a male and a female, 20 but the
degree of difference in size, cranial thickness and occipital morphology between
them seems to preclude this interpretation.         When the many bones from
Atapuerca have been assembled and studied, we will be in a much better
position to answer such questions.



Neanderthals on the scene
Until recently, scientists believed that the fossil       humans discovered      in
Ehringsdorf from 1908 onwards dated from the last interglacial stage, about
120,000 years ago. As we saw earlier, however, they are now thought to be
almost twice as old, dating from the interglacial stage 7, some 100,000 years
earlier.   The human remains from this site show certain clear Neanderthal
characteristics, especially at the   back of the    skull, as well as   some more
primitive features (such as thick skull bones, pi. 26). So, based on the new dates,
we currently believe that 'early' Neanderthals had evolved in Europe by
230,000 years ago. 21
  More 'early' Neanderthals are known from the long cold period, stage 6,
which occurred between 180,000 and 130,000 years ago (table p. 47), including
the two Biache partial skulls (pi. 21). 22 These consist of the upper jaw and back
of a probable female skull, and parts of the front of the skull and face of a
probable male. Unfortunately, the two skulls have been studied by rival teams
of French researchers, which does      little   to help our understanding of the
material as a whole. Also from the       same cold stage come the enigmatic
Fontechevade remains which were once a cornerstone of the 'presapiens'
hypothesis, and remains from other French caves e.g. Lazaret and Abri Suard.
   Material dating to the last interglacial proper - 130,000-1 1 5,000 years ago -
from caves such as Bourgeois-Delaunay in France and the Saccopastore gravel
pit in Italy, predominantly display anatomical features characteristic of the late

Neanderthals, although even these remains are not unambiguously Nean-
derthal. Both the Saccopastore skulls, for instance, have a relatively small brain
size like earlier hominids, and the face of Saccopastore 2 resembles a scaled-

down version of the Petralona face. Some of the large body, in both senses of the
words, of material from Krapina in Croatia may also date from this time. 23
  By 70,000 years ago, Europe was in the grip of the last Ice Age, and there is
no clear evidence that the area was inhabited by any people other than




                                                                                            69
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              Neanderthals for the next 30,000 years or so. However, the situation in Africa
              was very different, as we shall see in Chapter 6. The period from 115,000 to
              35,000 years ago is the time of the classic western Neanderthals. These are
             represented not only by remains from the French sites of La Chapelle-aux-
              Saints, La Ferrassie and now Saint-Cesaire, but also by less certainly dated
             finds such as the early ones from Engis and Spy in Belgium, Gibraltar, and the
              original Neander Valley skeleton. Further east there is the material from the
              Amud and Kebara caves in Israel, and the Shanidar skeletons from the
              mountains of northern Iraq. The partial skeletons we referred to in Chapter 1
              almost all come from this time range, and they form the basis for our detailed
              description in Chapter 4. The material available for investigating the origins of
              these much later Neanderthals is, as we have now seen, rather scattered or
              fragmentary. Prior to the Atapuerca discoveries, anthropologists William
              Ho wells and Erik Trinkaus conducted a census of some 19 'early' Neanderthal
              findspots and  showed that the remains must have come from at least 75
              individuals. 24    By comparison,fossils from the 52 sites where the later

              Neanderthals have been found could be added up to a minimum of 200
              individuals. Some of these are represented by just a few teeth while others are
              fairly complete skeletons.




             Some evolutionary models
             Having presented the data on Neanderthal ancestry it is now time to look at
             them in terms of the models of human evolution. As we have indicated, the
             palaeontological record is often obscure, not so much from a lack of information
             but from conflicting ideas about how it should be organized and what explains
             its various patterns. These ideas are what make the subject both endlessly

             fascinating and frustrating for those who expect some sort of final answer.
                There are two concepts at the heart of the evolutionary process which need to
             be examined. The first deals with how we recognize a species. Species are
             generally regarded as the basic units of both       taxonomy (the naming and
             ordering of fossils) and evolutionary change. Although not an evolutionist, the
             eighteenth-century naturalist Carolus Linnaeus produced a system for naming
             species which is still in use today. He proposed that species should be identified
             by an individual name given to a representative specimen, the name to be
             written lower case (and normally italicized). This name would be joined to a
             genus name, written with an initial capital letter, which grouped together
             similar species. Linnaeus' binomial system operates in the case of our species as
              follows: we all belong to the species sapiens ('wise'), with the type being self
             evident to Linnaeus ('know thyself was his comment). Linnaeus placed us
              with some other weird and wonderful species (all now invalid or non-existent)
              in the genus      Homo. As we saw in Chapter 1, today Homo sapiens is usually
              grouped with only two other species in the genus Homo: Homo habilis and Homo
              erectus.There are further groupings of genera into families, ours being
              Hominidae, which also includes our closest fossil relatives, members of the




70
                                                                           NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


Pliocene genera Australopithecus and Paranthropus.
  The methods used to name species raise implications for taxonomy, as well
as what we consider significant in order to understand human evolution.          We
have already seen in this chapter the disputes that attend the interpretation of
some fossils. This is usually due to disagreements over the extent of variation in
a species, and how different fossils should be grouped to accurately reflect the

underlying process of evolutionary change. 25
  The second issue concerns the mechanics of evolutionary change. According
to current scientific thinking, speciation - the process by which new species are

formed - is most commonly a product of the geographic isolation of an
interbreeding group or population. Set out by Ernst Mayr, this geographical
model of speciation is known as allopatry, and in the case of human evolution
may draw on genetic, anatomical and archaeological evidence. 26 Isolation can
be produced either by geographical barriers, such as mountain formation or a
rise   in sea   levels,   or by   new behavioural or morphological obstacles to
interbreeding within a previously continuous population. The multiregional
and replacement models for speciation disagree over the extent of isolation
present in widely dispersed early human populations.
  Multiregional evolution emphasizes continuity in both time and space. 27
According to this model, isolation was never sufficient to allow allopatric
speciation, since genes (the basic units of heredity)          were circulated and
exchanged between all the human populations of the Pleistocene. There could
be no speciation because throughout the last i million years there was really
only one species:     Homo sapiens. This judgment implies that since the first
dispersal of hominids out of Africa a million years or              more ago, all the
observable variation is within this one species. Multiregionalists argue that the
mechanism of change was predominantly behavioural, with anatomy event-
ually evolving to accommodate progressive changes in behaviour that usually
involved improvements in technology. These changes, like the genes,
circulated      around the inhabited world. The different regional lineages
responded in similar ways to these universal forces, directing change globally
towards modern-looking humans. Nevertheless, certain local differences were,
at the same time, being maintained. Selection for specific features in particular

environments kept them in local populations as they gradually became more
modern, e.g. the large noses of Neanderthals were maintained throughout the
transition to modern Europeans, probably in response to the European climate,
and the strong cheek bones of Javanese Homo erectus were maintained in the
transition to modern native Australians, perhaps due to behavioural or dietary
factors.   The mechanism          of interregional gene flow   is    all-important in
multiregional evolution, to continually introduce new characteristics which can
be worked on by local selection, and to counterbalance the tendency to local
specializations     which would increase divergence between geographically
remote populations.
   The population replacement camp has not so far produced a comparable
                                                      28
theoretical dogma to account for evolutionary change.    Certainly, it is argued,




                                                                                               7i
NEANDERTHAL BEGINNINGS


              Modern           Modern               Modern      Modern
              Africans         Europeans           Asians       Australians




                              Neanderthals
                                                                Ngandong


              African          European            Asian        Indonesian
              cf.   erectus    cf.   erectus       erectus      erectus


              Modern
              Africans



                                                                              j i Two views of the origins of
                                                                              modern humans: the multiregional
                                                                              model (top) and the Out of Africa
                                                                              model. Each interprets the same
                                                                              fossil evidence in a radically
                                                                              different way.   The dashed lines in
                                                                              the multiregional model represent
                                                                              gene flow between regions.


              geographical isolation is implicated in the separation of Far Eastern Homo
              erectus populations         from those in the west generally referred to as 'archaic
              Homo sapiens", and is further implicated in the succeeding north-south
              divergence which led to Neanderthals and Moderns respectively in Europe and
              Africa. Some Neanderthal features can be linked to adaptation to the cold, and
              others to continuing selection for physical strength. For the inferred African
              origin of modern         Homo sapiens, we can guess that behavioural changes lay
              behind the reduction in skeletal robusticity which characterizes modern
              people, but precisely what they were (language? planning depth? technology?)
              remains uncertain. 28
                    The mechanism behind the spread around the world of this modern
              morphology and any accompanying behavioural pattern would have been
              population growth rather than any deliberate pioneering spirit. Successful and
              more intensive use of resources would have demanded a continual quest for
              further resources and new territories, and the gradual extension of such
              boundaries was possible because of these same adaptive abilities, even where
              there were already resident populations of Ancients. Economic competition for
              the available resources would be the mechanism of replacement of one
              population by another where there was coexistence, perhaps coupled in some
              areas with a small degree of interbreeding (in which e.g. a few Neanderthal
              genes would have been taken into the much larger modern human gene pool).
                    Such processes would have taken place over many millennia, and probably
              occurred in fits and starts in the face of continuing climatic change throughout
              the late Pleistocene. Such climatic changes would sometimes have aided the
              process of expansion - by extending open country and eliminating geographi-
              cal barriers such as water or ice - and sometimes hindered it, by re-establishing

              old barriers or creating new ones, e.g. deserts or thick forests. However, the
              cyclical nature of such environmental changes meant that the early Moderns
              were continually being offered new opportunities for dispersal and adaptation.




72
                                CHAPTER 4

                    Portrait of a Neanderthal




About 120,000 years ago we find a great change in the quality of the fossil
record. After this time archaeologists have available a       number of fairly
complete skeletons, both of Neanderthals and Moderns. Maybe this is because
the early   humans in Europe and western Asia developed a new method of
dealing with their dead around this time. Hitherto they may not have cared
about their dead or, perhaps, as is possible in the case of Atapuerca in Spain,
they merely abandoned the bodies in a cave. As we will see in Chapter 7, the
question of whether the Neanderthals ritually buried their dead is an extremely
complex one. Carnivores, for instance, may have played a decisive role in
determining the presence or lack of reasonably complete skeletal remains. But
whatever the explanation for the improvement in the skeletal record, we are
now in the fortunate position of having a number of skeletons of Neanderthal
men, women and children to study. There are more of these than we have yet
found of any earlier people or of their contemporaries from elsewhere in the
world, who either did not bury their dead or interred them in places much less
suitable for the preservation of bones than the caves of Europe and southwest
Asia.   The sample of Neanderthal skeletons is still not large: about a dozen
tolerably   complete examples of skulls and limb bones found together.
However, new discoveries are reported all the time, including in the last decade
the most complete trunk and upper limb skeleton of a Neanderthal yet found,
from Kebara Cave in Israel, and perhaps the youngest in terms of antiquity,
from the Saint-Cesaire rockshelter in France.
  Putting the Neanderthal finds together, we can build up a picture of what
these people looked like, what they were capable of doing with their bodies,
how they developed physically, what diseases they suffered from and, in rare
cases, what might have caused their deaths. Using data from modern people,
we can estimate the height and weight of Neanderthals, reconstruct how their
muscles worked, tell the size and shape of their brains (but not how well they
functioned compared with our own), and make educated guesses about how
well they might have spoken. It is even becoming possible to tell how quickly
Neanderthal children grew up, and there has been speculation about the length
of pregnancy in Neanderthal women - could it have been longer than in women
today?
   Starting with the head, we shall now make a tour of the Neanderthal body
looking at the way palaeoanthropologists are trying to piece together the jigsaw-
like   evidence, sometimes from scraps of bone, to build a portrait of these
remarkable people who lived from over 120,000 to 35,000 years ago.      1




                                                                                    73
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                        An Excursion Around the Sites of the Neanderthal World


                     Neanderthal sites generally fall into two categories: those, mainly
                     caves and rockshelters, which have yielded actual Neanderthal
                     remains -sometimes even complete skeletons; and those, largely
                     open and rockshelter sites, which have produced evidence
                     primarily of Neanderthal material culture (e.g. the Mousterian
                     stone tools traditionally thought to be Neanderthal handiwork) and
                     only few fossil finds.
                       Within the Neanderthal world, the two main areas in which
                     skeletons and stone tools have frequently been found together are
                     southwest France and the Middle East. The major sites in the west
                     are the rockshelters of La Ferrassie, Le Moustier and La Quina.
                     These have been dug over many years, and their stratigraphic
                     sections are still important for unravelling the changes in Mouster-
                     ian assemblages as discussed by Francois Bordes (Chapter 3). The
                     surviving deposits at all three sites have been re-excavated in
                     recent years to clarify climatic and chronological sequences, and at
                     La Quina to recover information about the spatial use of the
                     rockshelter.
                       In the Middle East, the caves of Mount Carmel outside Haifa have

                    been excavated on several occasions, particularly Tabun. And in
                    Iraq, the deeply stratified and rich deposits of Shanidar Cave have
                    proved immensely important for investigating Neanderthal ana-
                    tomy. Current work at Kebara Cave and Amud, combined with the
                    application of an absolute dating programme, has helped to clarify
                    the relationship in this area between the earliest anatomically
                    modern humans and the Neanderthals.
                       Sites with such rich archaeological deposits and fossil remains,
                    however, are rare. Surrounding them are many open sites and




              The Neanderthal head and brain
              From the time of the original Neander Valley find in 1856, as we saw in Chapter
              1, anatomists recognized that they   were dealing with a large-brained creature,
              whose skull and brain shape differed from our own.


              Brains and brows
              The Neanderthal skull was long, but peculiarly flattened on top, a feature
              which we now know to have been common in early humans, and one which the
              Neanderthals inherited from their Homo erectus ancestors. Also inherited from
              them was the bar of bone above the eye sockets, but in the Neanderthals - as in
              the earlier Petralona skull - the eyebrow ridges were formed into two arches
              and were lightened internally by large air spaces called the frontal sinuses.
              Although Neanderthal brow ridges were strong even in some females (such as




74
                                                                        PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




       rockshelters (known in France as abris) which have yielded just
       stone tools of Middle Palaeolithic form or much more fragmentary
       fossil material. One of the most important sites from a chronological
       viewpoint is Combe Grenal in southwest France. Others include the
       Grotte Vaufrey and La Chaise, where more complete fossil remains
       have been found.
          In other parts of the Neanderthal world, artifact sites are rarely so

       prolific. In centralEurope, sites in southern Germany such as the
       Bockstein and Klaussenische Caves have produced only small
       assemblages of stone tools. This is also the pattern in Hungary at
       the open-air site of Erd, near Budapest, and in sites from the north
       European, Russian and Ukrainian plains such as Salzgitter Leben-
       stedt and Molodova. The last site has seen large-scale excavations
       of multiple horizons and the recovery not only of substantial
       numbers of artifacts but also the remains of structures (Chapter 9).
         Sites rich in artifacts can be found in northern Europe, but they
       are rare. On the island of Jersey, large collections of Middle
       Palaeolithic artifacts were excavated at the headland site of La
       Cotte de St Brelade. Here an impressive sequence starts 250,000
       years ago and continues through to the last glaciation. The piles of
       mammoth and rhino bones found in two levels have been
       interpreted as separate hunting episodes in which small herds
       were stampeded over the cliff (Chapter 7).
         There are many Mousterian sites in southern Europe: in the
       Iberian peninsula, France,   Italy, Croatia and Greece. The Nean-

       derthal remains at these sites are often highly fragmentary as at
       Devil's Tower (Gibraltar), Hortus (France), Guattari (Italy), Krapina
       and Vindija (Croatia).




the Tabun woman) and were already developing in children of about eight (e.g.
the Teshik Tash boy), they were nevertheless considerably reduced at the sides
compared with those of Homo erectus or their European precursors. The exact
                                                        2
function of the brow ridge is still a matter of dispute, and one of the most
popular explanations (absorbing stresses and strains from the action of the jaws
and teeth) has not been supported by experiments using monkey                     skulls.

Perhaps it provided a signal, even a threat, to others, or maybe it just acted to fill
a vulnerable space above the eye sockets. Whatever the reason, the size of the
brow ridge was less important to Neanderthals than to earlier humans. This is
also reflected in the large size of their frontal sinuses. In Homo erectus the brow
ridges mainly consisted of compact bone, but by the time of middle Pleistocene
humans such as those represented by the Petralona and Broken Hill skulls, the
brow ridge was mostly an empty structure, a trend which the Neanderthals
continued.




                                                                                               75
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL


braincase wider at middle or bottom                                                                           shorter, flatter parietal bones
                                                            low forehead (flatter frontal bone)

                                                                                                                       voluminous, long, wide
                                                                                                                            and low braincase




high rounded
orbits


high, wide and
                                                                                                                                shorter bulging
voluminous nose
                                                                                                                                 occipital bone

inflated cheeks                                                                                                          with suprainiac fossa
(no canine fossa)
                                                                                                                larger juxtamastoid eminence

large front teeth                                                                                         smaller mastoid process


                                                                                                  retromolar gap behind 3rd molar


                                                                                     mental foramen (hole) usually under 1 st molar




                        Large noses
                        Also important to the Neanderthals were their noses, which must have been
                        remarkably prominent. In fact, in some cases the nasal bones jutted out nearly
                        horizontally below the brows. Both the internal and external size of their nasal
                        cavities      was large. This has led to suggestions that they used their noses to
                        warm and humidify the cold and dry air of their Ice Age environment. It has
                        even been suggested that the Neanderthal nose was positioned far forward in
                        order to distance the incoming cold contents of the nasal cavity as much as
                        possible from the delicate and vulnerable brain tissues. 3 In comparison with
                        earlier fossil skulls, those of the Neanderthals do indeed have relatively longer

                        noses, although the wide breadth is consistent with that of possible ancestral
                        forms such as the ones from Steinheim and Petralona. Compared with modern
                        skulls,    the Neanderthal combination of great nose length and breadth                                     is

                        unusual. Modern cold-adapted people, such as the Inuit of the Arctic, tend to
                        have long but narrow nasal openings, while short, broad noses are mostly found
                        in   warm conditions. This suggests that the Neanderthal nasal form might
                        reflect a unique combination of the effects of low temperatures and humidity on

                        an archaically modelled           skull. Finally,       it   has even been proposed that the
                        Neanderthal nose was actually a means oflosing heat generated by a very active
                                      4
                        life style,       but it is difficult to imagine that the Neanderthals were more active or
                        liable to heat stress than earlier or contemporaneous tropical humans who did

                        not have such large noses. (However, overheating and sweating, followed by
                        freezing, would have been harmful in cold conditions.)


                        Neanderthal teeth and roots
                        The Neanderthals must have had special uses for their front teeth, for these are
                        very large and often heavily worn compared with those of their probable




76
                                                                                         PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL


                                       longer curved parietal bones                                     braincase widest higher up
voluminous, long, narrower
and higher braincase
                                                                                                                       brow ridge
                                                                                                                 smaller or absent
                                                                                                               (especially at sides)




                                                                                                                    lower, squarer
                                                                                                                             orbits

                                                                                                                   lower, narrower
                                                                                                                              nose

                                                                                                                      canine fossa
                                                                                                                 (hollowed cheeks)


                                                                                                                smaller front teeth

more prominent mastoid process
(especially in males)


      no retromolar gap behind 3rd molar

              mental foramen (hole) usually under premolars

         32    (Left) The Chapelle-aux-Saints skull, indicating Neanderthal features. (Above) The skull of
         anatomically modern Cro-Magnon 1, with the features characteristic of Homo sapiens labelled.



         ancestors. The large size of their front teeth is particularly notable considering
         that the rest of their dentition was relatively reduced in size (although still
         larger than the modern average). It is thought these teeth may have been used
         as a vice to hold objects other than just food items. Evidence to support this idea
         has come from studies of the peculiarly heavy and rounded wear patterns and
         damage to the front teeth: they bear microscopic traces of material, presumably
         both animal and vegetable, pulled outwards across the clenched teeth. Such
         rounded wear has even been observed on a Neanderthal milk incisor from the
         French cave of La Quina, showing that such activities began early in life. 5
              Additional evidence of the importance of the front teeth in Neanderthals and
         their predecessors has            come from other microscopic studies of the front
         surfaces of these teeth. In an early sample (Atapuerca)                   and several later
         Neanderthals from Europe, Iraq and Israel unidirectional scratches have been
         observed, which suggest that something held in the teeth was being cut with
         stone tools. 6 When these tools penetrated the material in question, they left a
         tell-tale scratch mark on the teeth which reveals the direction of cut, indicating

         that the tool was usually held in the right hand. Along with data on the brain
         shape of Neanderthals and the stronger development of their right arms, this
         implies that - like modern humans - most Neanderthals were right-handed.
         Furthermore, there is evidence that this behaviour started early, in both senses,
         since the characteristic scratches are present on a child's milk canine from the
         middle Pleistocene site of Atapuerca. It is possible to see the importance of the
         front      teeth   as   a   general feature of early         human behaviour which was
         accentuated in the Neanderthals.
              Like the front teeth of their ancestors and certain modern peoples (especially
         those from eastern Asia), the upper incisors of the Neanderthals were built up




                                                                                                                                 77
    PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



                         by ridges on the sides. This trait is known as 'shovelled' or shovel-shape, while
                         the back teeth often had additional cusps.
                           One of the most unusual aspects of many Neanderthal back teeth is the
                         presence of taurodont or 'bull-toothed' roots, as         first   recognized in the
                         Neanderthal teeth from Jersey and Krapina in Croatia. The odd shape of these
                         roots is produced by a delayed turning-in of the base of the roots during their

  non-taurodont tooth
                         growth, so that they are poorly- or unseparated from each other. The pulp
                         cavity inside the tooth is also expanded into the large roots. This feature may be
                         related to the heavy wear suffered by Neanderthal teeth, since a tooth with
                         unseparated roots can continue to operate as an intact chewing surface even
                         when worn through the crown. Taurodontism is found frequently in some
                         modern populations such as the Inuit, and the unusual root growth responsible
                         for the condition in Neanderthals also seems common in people with extra               X
                         (female) chromosomes.

    taurodont tooth
                         Jaws and faces
33 Schematic cross       Either side of the Neanderthal nose, the cheek bones were swept back, giving a
section of a non-
                         streamlined appearance to the middle of the face, and the cheeks were inflated
taurodont and a
taurodont tooth          rather than hollowed. This morphology is unlike that of both Homo erectus and
illustrating the         modern humans, but inflated cheeks are found in earlier European fossils such
difference between the
                         as Petralona. As the whole middle of the face was pulled out in relation to the
sizes of the two pulp
cavities.                sides, the upper jaw and teeth it contained were also pulled forward relative to

                         the cheek bones and the back of the skull.         Not surprisingly, the forward
                         position of the teeth was reflected in the unusual shape of the lower jaw or
                         mandible, with a space or retromolar gap behind the wisdom teeth before the
                         bone of the mandible swept up towards the jaw joint (pi. 40).
                           All these features distinguish the Neanderthals          from    earlier   and    later

                         peoples, as well as from their contemporaries in Africa and the Far East, and
                         many palaeoanthropologists have viewed the characteristics as evolutionary
                         specializations related either to cold adaptation or to the special role of the front
                         teeth.   However, some of those who favour the model of regional continuity
                         regard the unusual shape of the Neanderthal face not as specialized, but as a
                         logical intermediate stage between the big, projecting faces of earlier hominids,
                         and the small faces of modern Europeans, which are tucked in under the
                         braincase. According to this view, the musculature of the outer cheek region
                         was reduced in the evolution of the Neanderthals, leading to a change in the
                         orientation of the cheek bones relative to the still projecting front of the face;
                         this resulted in the characteristic swept-back appearance of the Neanderthal

                         cheeks. In time the front of the face itself became less projecting, perhaps due to
                         the decreased importance of the front teeth, and this contributed to the
                         appearance of the modern European facial shape. 7
                           However, supporters of the multiregional continuity model                   for    the
                         Neanderthals have a problem to explain. The two-stage reduction they favour,
                         which led to the modern European face via the Neanderthals, was unique to the
                         Neanderthal area. Human evolution in other regions seems to have proceeded




    78
                                                                                                     cranium



                                                                                                     facial bones


                                                                                                     mandible (jaw)
                              large and wide rib cage
                                                                                                     clavicle

                              long clavicle

                                                                                                     scapula
                              wide scapula with more
                              muscle attachments along                                               sternum
                              rear edge
                                                                                                     rib

                              large shoulder joint                                                   humerus

                                                                                                     vertebra

                                                                                                     pelvis
                              large elbow joint
                                                                                                     sacrum
                              bowed and short forearm                                                superior pubic
                                                                                                     ramus
                              wide hips
                                                                                                     radius

                              large hip joint, rotated outwards                                      ulna
                                                                                                     carpals
                                                                                                     metacarpals
                              hand with strong grip
                              and wide fingertips                                                    phalanges

                              long, thin superior pubic ramus
                                                                                                     femur
                              rounded, curved and
                              thick-walled femur shaft
                                                                                                     patella


                              large and thick patella

                                                                                                     tibia


                                                                                                     fibula
                              short, flattened and thick-walled tibia




                              large ankle joint
                                                                                                     tarsals

                                                                                                     metatarsals
                              wide and strong toe bones                                              phalanges


34 Here the skeleton of a typical male Neanderthal (left) is contrasted with that of a modern
male. The Neanderthal has a much more robust and stocky physique than his modern counterpart.




directly from the robust faces of earlier humans to the modern face, through a
single process of reducing the overall size of the face in concert with its gradual
retraction under the braincase. 8       We therefore believe            it is   more probable that
the latter process was responsible for the evolution of all modern human faces,
and that this facial morphology then supplanted that of the Neanderthals in
Europe.


Chins and shelves
We have already mentioned the forward position of Neanderthal teeth in the
jaw and some of the characteristics of these teeth, but there are some other
features of the Neanderthal mandible which should also be explained.                          One




                                                                                                                    79
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                                          Neanderthal Geography


                     The Neanderthals occupied many environments within middle and
                     late Pleistocene Europe. We have seen in Chapter 2 the range of
                     habitats and animal species they lived with and exploited, but
                     reconstructing past population densities and other demographic
                     patterns is more difficult. What we can see is that Neanderthals
                     were not capable until after 60,000 years ago of colonizing the very
                     seasonal environments of the Russian plains or indeed the high
                     mountain areas. Their optimal habitats were in the western plains
                     (where seasonal variation      in   temperature was moderated, as
                     today, by oceanic climates) and on upland plateaux of modest
                     elevation. In both environments - either on the northern plains of
                     France, Belgium, England and Germany, or in the sheltered valleys
                     which dissect the rolling uplands of southwest France, southern
                     Germany and central Europe - sites were located to exploit the
                     large, diverse herds of animals upon which the Neanderthals
                     depended. The long sequences at sites such as Le Moustier or
                     Combe Grenal in the Dordogne, rich in stone tools, point to the
                     repeated use of such localities over many centuries and millennia.
                        If we take a north-south transect from England to Iberia, we can


                     see that such rich assemblages in multi-level cave sites occur more
                     frequently in the southern and Mediterranean regions of the
                     continent. While this pattern is difficult to translate into numbers of
                     people or density of population, what it does indicate is a long-term
                      signature' of past settlement. We should not be surprised that the
                     general trend is one of increasing population and greater continuity
                     of settlement in the animal-rich southern latitudes of the continent;




              concerns the hole or foramen which lies on the inside of the rear upright
              portion, the ascending ramus. This mandibular foramen carries a nerve which
              runs to the front of the jaw, but what is unusual is the bony lip which is formed
              across the foramen in two out of every three Neanderthal jaws examined. This
                                  human and ape jaws, as well as in earlier human fossils, 9
              lip is rare in modern

              although it does seem to be present in about a quarter of Cro-Magnon jaws.
              The function of this bony lip seems to be related to the strong pull of the
              sphenomandibular ligament which runs from the ear region down to the
              vicinity of the mandibular foramen. In Neanderthals, and presumably in some
              Cro-Magnons as well, this ligament must have played an important role in
              holding the jaw steady during strong muscle actions.
                One other feature of the Neanderthal jaw worth mentioning is the slight
              development of a chin in some Neanderthal specimens, particularly the later
              ones. The front of the jaw is a weak area in mammals, since this is where the two
              original halves of the jaw meet during growth, and eventually fuse together.




80
                                                                    PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




       this trend is  repeated in the Middle East according to data from
       Israel and the Negev Desert.    We suspect from these patterns that
       Neanderthals in northern parts of the continent tended to abandon
       and re-occupy regions more frequently than their southern counter-
       parts, as climate affected the abundance and predictability of
       animal resources; Neanderthal populations in this part of the world
       were therefore likely to ebb and flow. The data from open sites such
       as Erd in Hungary and Molodova on the Dnestr River in the Ukraine
       are more difficult to quantify and compare by means of such
       transects. But a glance at the distribution map of Mousterian sites
       (commonly associated with the Neanderthals) shows a reduction in
       population at sites in the southern and western parts of Europe, as
       continental climates start to present problems for survival.
         What therefore emerges from this simple survey is that there
       were two demographic centres for the Neanderthals - western
       Europe and the Middle East - a conclusion supported by evidence
       both from Neanderthal remains and from the density of artifacts and
       the richness of cave and open site sequences. These centres are
       the loci of the key sites and classic sequences e.g. La Quina, Pech
       de I'Aze and Combe Grenal in the west, and Mount Carmel, Amud,
       Jabrud and Shubbabiq in the Middle East. Surrounding these
       areas, which we assume had near continuous occupation, was a
       hinterland of more intermittent occupation, where expansion took
       place at climatically favourable times but - when faced with a
       thinning of resources - populations became locally extinct rather
       than intensified to maintain a presence.




When the muscles at the base and sides of the skull work on the rear of the lower
jaw, especially in skulls where the braincase is large as it is in Neanderthals and
modern humans, the front of the jaw is put under constant pressure and needs
to be reinforced. In apes, this reinforcement is achieved by the development of

the 'simian shelf, a bony shelf across the front of the base of the jaw. In early
hominids the strengthening is accomplished by the mandibular torus, an
internal ridge of bone which runs across the back of the symphysis, while in
modern humans and some Neanderthals the bony ridge forms on the outside of
the lower jaw to form a chin.


Brain size
The shape of the Neanderthal braincase was directly related to the shape of the
brain itself. Both were long, low and flattened in comparison with those of
modern people, and more similar to those of Homo erectus and the middle
Pleistocene ancestors of the Neanderthals. But in contrast to earlier and many




                                                                                           81
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              present-day humans, the Neanderthals were very large-brained, the breadth of
              the brain being especially developed.
                 We know this detail because, although we do not have a fossilized
              Neanderthal brain, we can make a cast in silicon rubber from the inside of a
              Neanderthal skull and recreate the general proportions of the brain                     it

              contained. While the largest       Homo erectus brains were about 1,250 ml (2
              imperial pints) and modern brains average about 1,200-1,500 ml in volume,
              female Neanderthal brains were about 1,300 ml and those of males about 1,600
              ml, extending to 1,740 ml in the Amud man. 10 Curiously, a large brain size was
              also characteristic of the earliest modern people of Europe and Asia. The brains
              of both the Neanderthal 'Old Man' of La Chapelle-aux-Saints and the 'Old
              Man' of Cro-Magnon were over 1,600 ml in volume.
                 The significance of these large brains has long been disputed (Chapter 1). In
              the earlier years of this century it was believed that the Neanderthal brain was
              markedly inferior to a modern brain despite its great size, because it was larger
              at the   back (the occipital lobes) - supposedly the location of the 'baser'
              functions - and smaller at the front (the frontal lobes), thought to be the seat of
              reasoned      belief.   But knowledge of brain functions was then even more
              rudimentary than it is today. Experts such as Sir Arthur Keith and Sir Grafton
              Elliot Smith believed they could recognize all manner of 'primitive' features in
              the Piltdown brain reconstruction, as well as in those of Neanderthals. Since we
              now know that the fraudulent Piltdown braincase actually came from a human
              skull which was only a few hundred years old, these so-called primitive features
              were largely in the eyes of the beholders. Furthermore, as both these great
              anatomists have at one time or another been implicated in the Piltdown forgery,
              we feel that to classify brains as primitive according to their external features is
              equally questionable scientifically.
                 As far as Neanderthal brains are concerned, the pendulum has swung to the
              other extreme, partly in reaction to previous errors of interpretation and partly
              in recognition of our present ignorance. Thus many palaeoanthropologists are

              now reluctant to judge the quality of Neanderthal brains at all, or are content to
              assume that there was little intellectual difference from modern humans.
              Opinions tend to fluctuate. Carleton Coon, for instance, dressed Boule's
              Neanderthal in a hat and coat to emphasize the similarities with modern people
              (fig. 11),   but later described the Neanderthal brain as having 'a luxuriance of
              gorilloid features'.
                 The large size of the Neanderthal brain now tends to be seen as a correlate of
                                                                       11
              their large body mass (the 'meat head' hypothesis             ),   and perhaps also of the
              cool environments in which many of them lived. Brain sizes in modern humans
              are related in a general        way   to both   body   size        and the environmental
              temperature in which a population lives. These two factors are not independent
              of each other. Populations living in higher (cold) latitudes tend to be both larger
              brained and larger bodied, probably because in the past such physiques were
              selected for efficient heat conservation, than those living in lower (warmer)
              latitudes.




82
                                                                                PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



   For all the recent swing of the pendulum, however, the incontrovertible
differences in shape and proportion between Neanderthal and modern brains
are certainly of unknown significance.                We now know that people can survive
adequately with extensive damage to some areas of the brain (brains deformed
by disease or the cultural practice of head binding can assume very peculiar
shapes, yet seemingly function normally), but very badly with only limited
damage to certain key areas. It is evident that some parts of the brain are
specialized for particular functions, such as those concerned with the senses,
while other parts have an organizational role.
   The areas which interlink and integrate the functions of the different parts of
the brain are obviously key elements of intelligence in modern humans, but we
know nothing - and probably will never know anything - in either quantitative
or qualitative terms about such areas in the Neanderthal brain.                       So it is
dangerous to assume that brains of different shape and proportions must
necessarily be different in quality. This is not to say, however, that there were
no quantitative or qualitative differences between Neanderthal and modern
human brains, only that the evidence of endocranial casts is insufficient to
judge, and we may be better off looking for evidence of brain capabilities in the
archaeological record (Chapter 9).
  An additional conclusion we can draw from endocranial casts is that
Neanderthals and early modern humans - like people today - had cerebral
dominance,        i.e.   the right and    left   halves of the brain were specialized for
particular functions. In living people, there is a clear statistical relationship
between having a larger occipital lobe on the left side, a larger frontal lobe on
the right side,and right-handedness. Most Neanderthal and early modern
human endocranial casts display a similar pattern, indicating the predominance
of right-handers even in prehistoric times 12 - a conclusion reinforced, as we
have seen, by their stronger right arms, by the cut marks on several
Neanderthal front teeth, and by evidence from the resharpening of stone tools
(Chapter 5).


Skull shape
Moving from the inside of the skull to the outside, the large size of the occipital
lobes at the back of the Neanderthal brain                    is   reflected in the   common
occurrence of a bulging occipital bone, often called an occipital chignon or bun,
as in the Victorian hair-style.               There were also some oddities in the neck
musculature of Neanderthals which are shown by one or more pits (known as
suprainiac fossa) in the middle of the occipital bone. In contrast, it is more usual
in modern skulls to have a raised point of bone, the occipital protuberance, to

mark the central limit of muscle attachments. Additionally, at the lower edges
of the Neanderthal occipital bone - inside the ear region - there was usually a
prominent crest known as the juxtamastoid eminence or the occipitomastoid
         13
crest.        This may reflect the great importance of muscles running to the lower
jaw, which played a part in the special vice-like functions of the front teeth. The
prominence of            this   crest   was    also   accentuated by the fact that      many




                                                                                                       83
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                                                        occipital
                                                        bone




                 mastoid crest               large
                                                                           suprainiac fossa
                                            juxtamastoid
                   mastoid process                                                            occipital torus
                                            eminence


              35 The braincase of the Neanderthal skull from La Ferrassie, showing some of the key features
              that characterize the Neanderthals as a group.




              Neanderthal skulls have relatively small points of bone, mastoid processes, in
              the ear region. In modern people it is usual for the mastoid processes to point
              down well below the level of the juxtamastoid eminence; this even occurs in
              females, where the mastoid processes are relatively small. But the juxtamastoid
              development of Neanderthals usually dwarves that of the mastoid in both
              sexes.



              Neanderthal growth
              For a long time there has been speculation about the way Neanderthals
              developed during and after childhood, compared with modern people.
              Humans are different from the great apes in that we have much slower growth
              and development before maturity. For example, we take nearly twice as long to
              reach puberty. It has been assumed that this extended period of growth enables
              the developing child to absorb the complexities of its native culture through the
              medium of language, in order for the child to be adequately prepared for a
              human way of life.
                Because we are different from all the apes in this important respect, it seems
              highly likely that the human growth pattern evolved after the last evolutionary
              split from the apes. This would have been some time within the last 5 million

              years. But was the extended human growth pattern developed soon after the
              evolutionary split from the African apes, or was it more gradual or late in its
              appearance? Whatever the answer, we might expect the Neanderthals to be
              quite similar to modern people in their developmental pattern, since they are
              clearly closely related to us,         and are    late    on the evolutionary timescale.
              Moreover, the extended human growth pattern might also be necessary for the
              growth of a large brain, and this the Neanderthals certainly had. The only way
              that Neanderthals could be very different                from us would be if the human
              growth pattern was in fact uniquely evolved by anatomically modern humans
              during the last 150,000 years. There are now techniques, some of them still




84
                                                                      PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



controversial,   which allow us   to estimate the age at death of prehistoric

children. By comparing their maturity with those of modern children of the
same age, we can begin to build up a picture of similarities and differences in
development.
  Hitherto, reconstructions of hominid growth patterns have been made using
modern human comparative data; but such models are based on the assumption
that hominids were like us in their basic biology. A new method of age
estimation, however, based on the microscopic counting of incremental (i.e.
periodically added) lines on the surface enamel of the front teeth, allows an age
                                                                           14
assessment which is independent of any preconceived model of growth.            These
incremental lines or perikymata are the dental equivalents of tree rings, but
they form at a rate of about one a week rather than one a year. Where a whole
tooth crown is preserved unworn, it also preserves the record of its growth in its
perikymata. And if a root has been formed, its growth too must be estimated
and added to the crown development time. This means that for a tooth formed
soon after birth, such as an incisor,      it   is   possible to estimate the total
development time. The death of a child, therefore, is indicated by the cessation
of tooth development, and its age at death can thus be estimated.
  The perikymata aging technique has already challenged the conventional
view of growth in australopithecines (the early African hominids of 1.5-4
million years ago), which held that they were essentially human in their
development. The technique distinguished the robust australopithecines from
their more gracile counterparts, but neither show a modern human type of
extended growth. Indications are that both the earliest known australopithe-
cine, A. afarensis, and the later gracile form A. africanus, were very apelike in
maturing dentally at nearly twice the rate of human children - thus the first
known australopithecine fossil, the Taung child, would have been closer to
three years of age at death than to the six years commonly estimated. 15


Precocious children?
So far the technique has only been applied in detail to one Neanderthal fossil -
that of the Devil's Tower child from Gibraltar which preserves an unerupted,
but totally exposed, upper incisor, complete with a beautiful set of perikymata.
The child's remains probably date from about 50,000 years ago and consist of
parts of the skull, indicative of a very large brain size, and a lower jaw and part
of the upper jaw, both containing teeth. Conventional aging techniques, based
on the state of eruption and development of the teeth as well as the form of the
skull bones compared with those of modern children, suggested an age at death
of around five years.
  One expert on Neanderthal children, Ann-Marie Tillier, re-examined the
Devil's Tower bones and teeth, and surprisingly concluded that the remains of
two different children were mixed up in the material. 16 Most of the bones and
jaws did indeed belong to a five-year-old, as already generally believed.
However, Tillier believed the temporal bone (which includes the ear region) to
be less mature than the rest, belonging instead to a three-year-old.




                                                                                             85
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



                 Unfortunately, this conclusion could not be tested in the most straightfor-
              ward way, by seeing if the bones would fit together as a single skull, because the
              different bones were not sufficiently complete. So Chris Stringer and his
              colleagues set out to test Tillier's hypothesis by applying the perikymata aging
              technique to the unerupted central incisor of the upper jaw (or, rather, an exact
              surface replica of it). The result clearly suggested an age at death of three to four
                       17
              years.        Since this is compatible with Tillier's estimate for the temporal bone,
              there is no longer any need to assume that more than one child is represented.
              The young age of the Devil's Tower child makes its brain size - estimated at
              about 1400 ml, close to the modern adult average - even more remarkable. The
              development of the child's molar teeth would also have been well-advanced for
              a three-year-old. This specimen thus suggests that Neanderthal children grew

              up quite fast.
                 This idea is supported by other data. For example, it has been observed that
              Neanderthal children had a greater robusticity and muscularity in their limb
              bones than their modern counterparts. This is noticeable even at an age before
              heavy exercise could have had any influence, indicating that it was originally
              inherited, even if later activity subsequently added to the effect. From the skull
              and dentition, some palaeoanthropologists had previously suggested that there
              was precocious dental development in Neanderthals, but it is only with the
              advent of independent age estimators that this idea can be properly tested.
              Further application of these methods to the study of Neanderthal children will
              teach us much more about their biology, but it is already evident that at any
              given age, they were likely to have been more robust, lower-skulled, larger-
              faced and as large or perhaps larger-brained than comparable modern children.


              The hip and pelvis
              Another unusual aspect of the Neanderthals concerns the front of the pelvis.
              Regardless of age or sex, the upper front part of the Neanderthal pelvis (known
              as the superior pubic ramus) shows an unusual structure. The superior pubic

              ramus is long, thin, and relatively flattened (pi. 41). Very unusually, therefore,
              this part of the Neanderthal skeleton actually seems more gracile or lightly built

              than that of modern humans. Several theories have been advanced to explain
              this feature, none of them entirely satisfactory. It was suggested, for example,

              that the unusual pubic length would have increased the volume of the birth
              canal by up to 20 per cent, allowing Neanderthal women to give birth to larger
              and more mature babies, which might have been advantageous for infant
              survival in a difficult environment. An increase in the size of babies could have
              resulted either from faster foetal growth over the same gestation length, or from
              normal growth over a longer period in the uterus, perhaps even as long as a
                      18
              year.
                Recent research on modern populations, however, has come up with another
              explanation. In modern populations such as the Arctic Inuit, where large heads
              are combined with small stature, it appears that in some ways they show a form
              approaching the Neanderthal pelvic condition. But these populations show no




86
                                                                                 PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




                                                                                   margin of pelvic inlet
                                                                                  modern human




                                                                                  margin of pelvic inlet
                                                                                  Kebara Neanderthal




                                                         pubic ramus modern human

                                                         pubic ramus Kebara Neanderthal


j6 Superior view of the reconstructed Neanderthal pelvis from Kebara Cave in Israel. Like
other Neanderthal examples, the pubic bone of the Kebara pelvis is relatively thinner and longer
than it is in modern people. The most likely explanation for this pubic lengthening lies in
differences between the locomotion of Neanderthals and modern people, rather than differences in
gestation period or other developmental factors as some scholars have suggested.




noticeable difference in gestation length or foetal growth rates from other
modern groups, which suggests that the trend towards having a longer pubic
ramus in the Inuit and other similar peoples is because the mother is small and
the baby's head relatively large. Perhaps the Neanderthals merely displayed an
extreme version of this condition. 19 Their women were certainly relatively
short in stature (see below) and their babies' heads were likely to have been
large.

   Unfortunately, this appealing idea is also unlikely to be the answer, because
the most prominent cases of Neanderthal pubic ramus lengthening are found in
big Neanderthal males such as the one from Kebara, which hardly supports the
idea that it is something especially connected with female reproduction! The
theory is further invalidated by the fact that young Neanderthals, well before
puberty, show pubic bone lengthening20             .   The Kebara adult pelvis - the most
complete Neanderthal pelvis yet found - also refutes such ideas since, although
   shaped differently from a modern one, it has no greater internal volume.
it is

The pubic bone differences serve primarily to widen the pelvis at the front,
rotating the blades of the pelvis outwards along with the hip joint. This has
little   effect   on the depth of the pelvis, front to back, which would be the
important factor in altering the size of the birth canal.
  If reproductive differences were not responsible for the peculiar pubic bone
anatomy of the Neanderthals, what could have been? Yoel Rak, who produced
the first detailed description of the Kebara pelvis, returns to the old idea - now
generally out of favour - that Neanderthals walked differently from modern
humans, and in this respect were retaining ancestral features of hip joint




                                                                                                            87
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              function which   modern humans have lost. 21      We shall discuss some other
              aspects of the pelvic anatomy later.


              Care for the elderly
              As well as speculation about the early stages of growth in Neanderthals, new
              data are also being gathered and interpreted about the other end of the life
              cycle: old age.   There is continuing controversy about the applicability of
              methods used to estimate the age at death of elderly individuals in samples of
              skeletons from the recent past, so there are even greater problems in applying
              these procedures to fossils. Nevertheless, new or more sophisticated methods
              of aging older individuals by detailed studies of the surface of the pelvis and the
              microscopic examination of growth in the thigh bone (femur) have allowed the
              age at death of some of the older Neanderthal individuals to be estimated. One
              particular study has reassessed the age at death of important specimens from
              Iraq and France. 22 The surprising fact that has emerged from this work is that
              it is difficult to find a Neanderthal estimated at more than 40 years old at death;

              this includes the so-called 'old man' of La Chapelle-aux-Saints, in spite of his

              injuries, tooth loss and joint disease.

                  Of the entire Neanderthal sample, apparently fewer than 10 per cent were
              aged over 35. The comparable figure in recent non-industrialized groups,
              such as hunter-gatherers and tribal agriculturalists, is about 50 per cent. Thus
              few Neanderthals were likely to have reached beyond middle age in modern
              terms. Two important consequences of this would have been reduced
              information derived from long-term experience, and a greater           number of
              'orphan' children.
                Significant survival beyond the reproductive age seems to be a special human
              characteristic not   found   in   other great apes. Such longevity requires a
              particular sort of adaptation in which individuals change their roles as they get
              older and become more dependent on others (particularly younger relatives)
              for their food and survival. It is possible that such post-reproductive survival
              was a characteristic of Cro-Magnon societies but not of the Neanderthals. Such
              a crisp division between the Ancients and Moderns, however, is a little blurred

              by the fact that some recent research calls into question the techniques used to
              age the Neanderthals (they have underestimated the age of old individuals in
              certain modern cemeteries). Also, we have evidence that some Neanderthals
              did care for the older, infirm individuals, such as the crippled       man from
              Shanidar (Shanidar 1; see below), who would have been unable to move far to
              find his own food.


              Language
              One of the most important features of modern humans is spoken language.
              From their sophisticated material culture, we usually assume the Cro-
              Magnons could also talk and communicate as modern people do. While we now
              know that apes can use symbols to build and arrange a large vocabulary, this is
              not the same thing as true language, which is a much richer, more complex and
                                                                                   PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL




teeth




J7   Scientists have compared the vocal apparatus of modern adults (left) with that of the Neanderthals, to assess
the speaking ability of Neanderthals. Sounds are produced in the larynx, hut to form words the tongue must vary
the size and shape of the mouth and pharynx.   The Neanderthal pharynx is limited by the larynx, which sits higher
in the throat than in modern humans.   Furthermore, since the tongue is long and rests almost entirely in the mouth
rather than the throat, it can only alter the size of the mouth. This single-chamber acoustical system may have
restricted Neanderthals to a slow and limited form of speech.




more structured means of communication than any animal possesses. The
discussion about the growth of Neanderthal children                      is   important to the
question of whether they had a true language of modern type or not.
     Language acquisition        in    modern children proceeds while the child is
learning fundamental facts about its environment and the society in which it
has been born. While the brain grows and important internal connections
between different areas are established, language is learnt, so that by the age of
six or seven - as the brain reaches its adult size - the child has acquired most of

the linguistic skills it will need thereafter. As many of us know to our cost, it is
never as easy to learn a language after this time. But if Neanderthal children
grew up more quickly, they might have had less time to learn the fundamentals
of a language and a complex way of life before their brain organization was
largely finalized.     Or looked at from the opposite perspective, perhaps their
simpler way of life did not require such learning.
     The possibility that the Neanderthals had a simpler system of communica-
tion than succeeding peoples is suggested by the anatomy of the base of their
                                                                                                 23
skulls, which can be used to judge the type of vocal apparatus they possessed.

In modern humans, the skull of a newborn child has a flat base, and the voice
box or larynx is positioned high up in the throat, near to the skull base. This
means that babies (like most other mammals) can eat or suckle, and breathe at
the same time without choking. However, as the child grows, and particularly
as language use develops, the larynx gradually descends to its adult position,
enabling the individual to produce a very wide range of sounds. Now the child




                                                                                                                      89
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              can no longer eat and breathe simultaneously; the danger of choking is the price
              we pay for possessing a human vocal tract and a long tongue. The descent of the
              larynx can be tracked by an accompanying change from a flat to an angled skull
              base.    The interesting thing about the shape of the skull base in some adult
              Neanderthals is that it more closely resembles the infant condition in modern
              humans than that of adults, which suggests that some Neanderthals did not
              possess a vocal tract of modern type. In other words the apparatus for a modern
              range of sounds had yet to evolve.
                The vocal potential of the Neanderthals is perhaps demonstrated in a more
              positive light by the first fossil hyoid bone of a Neanderthal ever found, part of
              the Kebara skeleton. The hyoid bone lies in the throat and is intimately linked
              with the structure of the vocal tract. The Kebara hyoid bone is rather small
              considering the very robust individual of which it was part, and is virtually
              indistinguishable from a modern one. 24 But the conclusions that can be drawn
              from this about the level of Neanderthal vocal abilities are hotly disputed.
              Some experts believe, for instance, that the similarities between the Kebara and
              modern hyoids must indicate that the Neanderthals had similar vocal skills to
              modern humans. 25 Others point out that even pigs have similar hyoids to us,
              and that the hyoid can therefore tell us nothing about language abilities. 26
                When Ed Crelin and Philip Lieberman began their pioneering work of
              reconstructing the vocal tract of a Neanderthal           some 20 years ago, they
              suggested that the Neanderthals probably lacked proper language. 27         More
              recently, these conclusions have been modified to argue for a restricted vocal
              repertoire    in    Neanderthals rather than a      fundamental lack of spoken
              language. 28 What they lacked phonetically they may have partially made up for
              with a gesture-based system of communication. It certainly seems difficult to
              believe that Neanderthals lacked language          if   they showed such complex
              behaviour as the intentional disposal of their dead (although, as we discuss in
              Chapter 7,     it   is   debatable to what extent Neanderthal burials are indeed
              evidence of complex behaviour). Moreover, when considering the work done in
              reconstructing vocal tracts in early humans, it should be remembered that some
              pre-Neanderthal fossils show a cranial base of fundamentally modern type, and
              this includes fossils such as the Steinheim and Petralona skulls which, as we

              have seen (Chapter 3), may represent the ancestors of the Neanderthals. It
              seems very unlikely that the ability to produce a human type of language was
              present in the European precursors of the Neanderthals, with their smaller
              brains and less sophisticated behaviour, and yet was lost by their          more
              advanced descendants.
                So, given what we know about the Neanderthal brain and child develop-
              ment, about the likely shape of the vocal apparatus in Neanderthals, and their
              way of life, we can assume that the Neanderthals did have at least a rudimentary
              form of language, but that it was probably simple in construction and restricted
              in its   range of expression. However, as we mentioned earlier, the ability to
              create and understand language rather than mere sounds is a function of the
              brain rather than the vocal tract, and the quality of the Neanderthal brain




90
                                                                      PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



(despite much speculation) is still unknown to us.     We will examine in Chapter 6
what the archaeological evidence tells us about the sophistication of the
Neanderthal brain and the scale and complexity of their societies, information
which we shall then compare in Chapter 9 with that for the Moderns.


The shape of Neanderthal bodies
Comparative statistics
Living peoples in different parts of the world have different body shapes and
sizes.   Some of the heaviest peoples alive today come from Europe, North
America and northern Asia, while people of lighter build are more common in
tropical and sub-tropical areas. Some of these differences must therefore be
related to the climatic environments in which people live - although of course
one also has to take into account factors such as varying nutrition.
   For example, young adult male Europeans tend to weigh between about 65
and 75 kg (143 and 165 lb) and females between about 55 and 63 kg (121 and 139
lb),     whereas   most   males   from   Papua   New       Guinea   are   less   than
60 kg (132 lb) in weight, and females less than 50 kg (no lb) - at least 10 kg
(22 lb) lighter in each case. Similarly there is a great range in height and body
proportions. European males and females are mostly over 170 cm (5 ft 7 in) and
160 cm (5 ft 3 in) tall respectively. In comparison, their counterparts in New
Guinea are likely to be less than 160 and 150 cm (5 ft 3 in and 4 ft 1 1 in) tall, a
difference of at least 10 cm (4 in) in each case. 29
   Two rules were formulated in the last century by Bergmann and Allen to
explain the variation in the weight and shape of living organisms. 30 Bergmann's
rule postulates that body weight will tend to be larger in cold conditions, while
Allen's rule suggests that body extremities will be relatively shorter. Both can
be explained by the need of organisms in cold conditions to conserve heat. They
can accomplish this by minimizing their surface area relative to their volume
and weight. In this way they can more closely approximate the ideal shape of a
sphere, which has the minimum surface area for its volume. These rules seem
to operate in a general way in modern human populations when we compare
tropical African populations with those of northern Europe or Asia. Since the
Neanderthals lived in relatively cold climates, we would thus expect them to be
heavy and to have short extremities such as limbs. Let us put these rules to the
test,   then, and compare the Neanderthal physique to that of the Moderns.


Neanderthal vital statistics
The bodies of Neanderthals were strongly built by the standards of living
peoples, but they were not particularly tall. Various formulae have been worked
out to estimate height in modern individuals where only part of the skeleton is
known. These formulae can be applied to fossil remains as well. However, it can
be difficult to judge how applicable these formulae are to the Ancients. If we use
the formulae devised for modern people of European origin, then Neanderthal
males would have had a height of about 169 cm (5 ft 6^ in) and females 160 cm




                                                                                             9i
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL


                                                                                        Egyptian^
                                                                                                     ^ American Black

                                                                                                      Pygmy
                                                                                       Mnlanosion




                                                      Belgia




                                  Mean   Index   of    Tibia/Femur      Length    (Crural   Index)


              38 Here the limb proportions (measured as the crural index) of a range of recent populations of
              Homo sapiens have been plotted against the temperature of their environment              .   Various fossil
              populations have also been placed on the graph, according to their mean crural index. Note how
              low the crural index of the Neanderthals is compared with other fossil samples; they thus appear
              to display the classic cold-adapted limb proportions that one would expect from Allen s rule.
              (Recent migrant groups such as South African whites have been plotted against a temperature
              based on their 'ancestral place of origin - i.e. western Europe - rather than their present location,
              as they appear to approximate more closely their ancestral body proportions).




              (5 ft 3 in).   On the evidence often partial skeletons from Europe and eight from
              the Middle East, the latter were slightly taller, the largest by far being the man
              from Amud (Israel) who was about 179 cm (5 ft 10^ in) tall. The smallest of the
              Neanderthal females came from La Ferrassie (France) and Shanidar (Iraq),
              both about 155 cm (5 ft 1 in) tall. 31
                   Until the very complete skeleton was discovered at Kebara (Israel), we had
              little idea of what the entire middle part of a Neanderthal skeleton was like, but

              it   seems that Neanderthals had very large, barrel-shaped chests and a long
              back, with relatively short legs. This short and stocky physique is reminiscent
              of that of modern Inuit, albeit more extreme, and by analogy it seems that
              adaptation to cold is at least partly responsible for Neanderthal body shape.
                   Estimating Neanderthal body weight is more difficult. It is only possible to
              make educated          guesses,         using       formulae       for   certain       body or skeleton
              measurements which express the stature:weight relationship of modern people.
              When these are applied to Neanderthal bones, some results indicate a greater
              weight than any living peoples, but others suggest that the Neanderthals
              weighed much the same                   as       lean   {not   overweight) Europeans,               who       are
              themselves among the heaviest of living peoples i.e. about 65 kg (143 lb) for
              Neanderthal males and 50 kg (no lb) for the females.
                   It is evident the Neanderthals had shorter forearms and lower legs than the




92
                                                                    PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



modern average. In modern peoples the shin bone (tibia) varies from being
about 79 per cent of the length of the thigh bone (femur) among the Norwegian
Lapps to 86 per cent in black African groups. So the average Neanderthal value
of 79 per cent exactly matches the lowest modern value, and is even lower than
the Inuit value of 8i per cent. In their relatively heavy bodies the Neanderthals
seem to conform to Bergmann's rule, and in the shorter ends of their limbs to
              32
Allen's rule.    That the Neanderthal physique was partly determined by
climate is further supported by the slight differences in limb proportions
between the Neanderthals who lived in glaciated Europe and those who lived in
the less extreme climates of the Middle East.


Strength
The bones of the Neanderthal skeleton were strongly built by modern
standards (pis. 39, 42, 43). 33 The joints of the elbow, hip and knee were large,
                             .




and the walls of the leg bones were very thick. These features were also present
in earlier humans. In fact it is our own rather puny bones which seem to be the
exception. The skeletons of the earlier peoples were continually subjected to
stronger forces than our own. This can be partly explained by the powerful
muscles which moved the bones. Neanderthal muscles often left marks of deep
or wide attachment areas on bone surfaces, while the thicker leg bones were
probably to counter fatigue resulting from the constant stress under which they
were placed.
  Perhaps the robust anatomy of the Neanderthals is indicative of their life-
style, withmuch more effort - and consequent wear and tear on the skeleton -
required to obtain food than is the case among modern mobile foragers. Since,
as we have seen, the greater muscularity and robusticity of the Neanderthals

developed in children at an early age, it would seem that this feature was
primarily inherited rather than purely the result of environment or life-style; it
was part of their middle Pleistocene heritage.


Posture and movement
The way the Neanderthal skeleton operated was probably also distinctive, with
particular  movements and postures favoured. 34 There is evidence that
Neanderthals often squatted on their haunches, as some living peoples do, since
their shin bones show 'squatting facets'. Contrary to earlier ideas, their hands
could perform delicate operations (although there is evidence that they were
usually held in a more flexed position during manipulations) and their grip was
very powerful. The structure of the shoulder blade was also different from that
of most living people. The differences centre on the strength of the muscles
attached to the upper arm bone, the humerus. These muscles may have been
especially developed to keep the arm from twisting during strong movement.
We have already seen that the pelvis was distinctive in Neanderthals, and this
may be related to the different way in which the hip joint operated, putting
emphasis on the strength of the sides of the thigh bones rather than their front
and back, as in modern people. The leg, ankle and foot bones were also strongly




                                                                                           93
PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



              built to withstand hard use. None of these features, however, indicate that the
              Neanderthals had a bent-kneed and apelike posture compared with our own (cf.
              %• 5)-

              Disease and death among the Neanderthals

              Following the first Neanderthal discovery in 1856, some scientists believed that
              the bowed appearance of the limb bones was due to the disease of rickets (which
              we now know to be caused by a deficiency of vitamin D). These days this theory
              findsfew supporters, for although most Neanderthal limb bones do show
              bowing to a greater or lesser extent, such features are found in earlier robustly
              built hominids as well as Neanderthals. Moreover, any other skeletal evidence
              of rickets is lacking. The bowing seems instead to be related to strong
              muscularity.
                The Neander Valley skeleton displays unequivocal evidence, however, of
              another abnormality: the elbow joint was deformed, probably by a badly healed
              fracture. Indeed, evidence of injury or disease in some form or another is found
                                                                       35
              in almost all reasonably complete adult Neanderthals.         The Shanidar 1 man
              from Iraq and an isolated arm bone from Krapina in Croatia also show similar
              serious arm injuries. Erik Trinkaus' study of the large sample from Shanidar
              revealed a whole catalogue of injuries and degenerative disease in the heads,
              arms, ribs, legs and feet. 36 The Shanidar 1 man, for example, may have suffered
              head injuries and extensive crushing of the right side of his body - possibly in a
              cave rock fall - followed by infections and partial paralysis. He was probably
              blinded in his left eye, and would have been considerably disabled, yet he must
              have lived with these injuries for several years (pi. 44). This unfortunate
              individual thus supports the argument that the Neanderthals sometimes took
              care of their sick. The Shanidar 3 man had a partly healed rib wound which
              could have been accidentally or deliberately inflicted by the weapon of another
              Neanderthal. This is a rare case in which we can be fairly confident that the
              wound was ultimately the cause of death, although the victim must have
              lingered on, perhaps for several weeks. The Shanidar 5 man had an extensive
              scalp wound which healed well, as did an individual from the Croatian site of
              Krapina.
                The most famous of all diseased Neanderthals is the so-called 'Old Man' of
              La Chapelle-aux-Saints     (France), originally studied by Marcellin Boule
              (Chapter 1). This skeleton has been restudied on a number of occasions, with
              much revision of Boule's unflattering conclusions about the subhuman nature
              of the individual concerned. 37 The idea has become widespread that many of
              the peculiar features of the specimen described by Boule were the result of its
              diseased condition, of which he failed to take account. However, a recent study
              concluded that Boule's interpretations - although flawed by present standards
              - were reasonable for their time and that he was in fact aware of some of the
              pathologies. 38 He judged the 'Old Man' degenerate on criteria other than his
              arthritis. The full list of maladies suffered by this poor character is very




94
                                                                       PORTRAIT OF A NEANDERTHAL



impressive. It includes degenerative joint disease in the skull, jaw, spinal
column, hip and        feet,   as well as a rib fracture   and extensive tooth   loss,

accompanied by abscesses. All this and not yet 40!
  The high incidence of degenerative joint disease in Neanderthals is perhaps
not surprising given what we know of the hard lives they led and the wear and
tear this would have produced on their bodies. But the prevalence of serious
injuries is more surprising, and indicates just how dangerous life was, even for
those who did manage to reach 'old age' in Neanderthal societies.



Neanderthal bodies and behaviour
Gathering together all the information presented in this chapter, we can create
a reasonable general portrait of the average Neanderthal man, woman or child.
Although we cannot reconstruct the colour of their skin or eyes, a reasonable
scientific argument can be proposed that in conditions of low sunlight they may

have had pale complexions. Neither is there any way to determine how hairy
they might have been. What we do know is that they were large headed, with
big noses, strong brows, low foreheads and           little   chin development. But
although they were short, squat and powerfully built, even as children, the
Neanderthals would have looked recognizably human as they carried out their
daily activities.
     The way they performed those activities, however, may have been less
efficient than that of their modern successors. Although we have no reason to

doubt that they had intelligence and memory, they may have depended more
on biological than cultural solutions to the varied problems of survival in their
world. The anatomy of both sexes shows they required more muscular effort
and activity to survive - brawn was probably still as important as brain to the
Neanderthals.       They must at least have had a simple language ability, and
although they probably aged quickly and died early by modern standards, there
was undoubtedly some supporting social structure to care for children who had
lost   parents and for disabled individuals. Arguably, such care was even
extended to a few individuals after their death (Chapter 7).
     At the end we are left with a fascinating, even paradoxical, portrait: one that
is   so human in some ways, yet so different from us in others.     We have come a
long way from Boule's Neanderthal (pi. 3) and Osborn's 'upward tendency'
(pi. 4). Just how different the Neanderthals were from modern humans will be

examined in Chapters 7 and 9. But in the meantime, the question that still
remains to be answered is whether it was the Neanderthal pattern of anatomy
and behaviour which gave rise to that of later peoples of fully modern type.
This is something we will discuss in Chapter 8, after we have looked in the next
two chapters at the different peoples alive in the rest of the inhabited world at
the time of the Neanderthals.




                                                                                              95
                                           CHAPTER 5

                         Humans at the Crossroads:
                             The Middle East Corridor



     The Middle East has clearly been of great importance during the last 10,000
     years   in   the   early   development of agriculture, pastoralism and other
     cornerstones of later Western civilization such as writing.       1
                                                                           But it has been of
     similar importance in the story of human evolution for the last million years,
     being the crossroads between three continents and faunal provinces. As Homo
     erectus spread out of Africa over        1   million years ago, the Middle East would
     have been on the migration routes to Asia and Europe. Within the small area of
     the eastern Mediterranean known as the Levant, closest to Africa, a variety of
     environments have always survived the regular climatic assaults of the
     Pleistocene glacial-interglacial cycles; this area provided a refuge as the climate
     grew colder in the north or more arid in the south. So it was, 100,000 years ago,
     as a new phase of human evolution began.
       The story of human evolution in the Middle East is very murky until about
     150,000 years ago, when a rather primitive hominid population, neither
     modern nor Neanderthal, seems to have occupied the Levant. The only
     informative human fossil from this time is an enigmatic front of a skull with
     part of the face preserved below. 2 This specimen was found in 1927 by Flinders
     Turville-Petre, an army officer, in the cave of Zuttiyeh in the Wadi Amud
     (Valley of the Pillar, named after an unusual column of rock) near Lake Galilee.
     Despite its fragmentary nature, the specimen has been much discussed, for
     attempts have been made to link it to the evolution of either modern humans or
     Neanderthals.      It   has a strong brow ridge and a narrow frontal bone, both
     primitive characters, but a rather           domed front, which gives a somewhat
     modern appearance          to   the   profile of the forehead. The upper face is
     transversely very flat, and the fragmentary cheek bone is angled as in modern
     humans. So in this last respect, the fossil is quite different from Neanderthals
     with their swept back cheek bones. Arguments have centred on whether this
     therefore makes the Zuttiyeh fossil modern. Unfortunately the angled
     morphology of the cheek bone is an ancestral characteristic which modern
     humans have retained, and it is therefore impossible to say whether the
     Zuttiyeh fossil is fundamentally modern or - as seems more likely - primitive.
     Most probably it lies close to the evolutionary divergence of the Neanderthal
     and modern groups, which is why its affinities are so difficult to ascertain.
        In this chapter we will first describe the fossil evidence from the key sites in
     the Middle East, evidence which we will then use to help us unravel the
     complex history of human evolution in the area.




96
                                         HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS! THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR



Tabun and Skhul
A much larger group of fossils which has also been difficult to place in the
evolutionary sequence is that from the two Mount Carmel caves of Skhul (es-
                                                            3
Skhul, 'cave of the kids') and Tabun (et-Tabun, 'the oven'). Excavations by an
Anglo-American team in the 1930s led to the uncovering of the remains of at
least ten men, women and children from the small cave remnant of Skhul, and a

smaller sample from the much larger cave of Tabun, including the partial
skeleton of a woman. The caves faced down a valley called the Wadi el-
Mughara (Valley of the Caves), which ran towards the Mediterranean coast.
This valley would have held water in a river for part of the year, and occupants
of the caves would also have had the choice of obtaining food resources from
Mount Carmel itself, rising up to nearly 500 m (1,640 ft), or travelling through
the valley to the wide coastal plain, over which they would have had an excellent
view (pi. 55).
  The Skhul material included several apparent burials, the most complete
being of adult males. The skeleton of Skhul 4 was lying on its right side with
folded arms and tightly flexed legs (pi. 54), while Skhul 5 lay on his back with
his head    bent down on to his chest and his legs also tightly flexed (pi. 53).
Within his arms was the jaw bone of a large wild boar.
  The Tabun material was less extensive and covered a much greater
stratigraphic depth than the Skhul hominids, which were all found in a single
layer about 1    m thick. The Tabun finds of a partially extended female skeleton
and an isolated larger (male?) mandible were recovered from layer C. Both the
Skhul and Tabun         fossil   hominids were associated with similar Middle
Palaeolithic (Levalloiso-Mousterian) artifacts, which led scholars to conclude
that the caves of Skhul and Tabun were inhabited at about the same time.
  Thus when Ted McCown and Arthur Keith published their detailed two-
volume report on the   sites, they assumed that the fossil humans were

approximate contemporaries and members of one population. 4 That popula-
tion   was clearly very variable, since the Skhul people were predominantly
modern-looking, while the Tabun woman was rather lightly built but was
otherwise very Neanderthal-like.          McCown and Keith concluded that the
Mount Carmel people were part of a human evolutionary radiation which was
clinal (gradually    changing) in nature. In Europe the radiation was towards
'classic'   Neanderthal forms, in the east towards early modern humans
(ancestors of the Cro-Magnons), while in the Levant an intermediate type had
developed     which could        be   called   'progressive'   Neanderthal - not an
evolutionary intermediate between Neanderthals and moderns, but a less
specialized Neanderthal and therefore somewhat closer to the Cro-Magnons.
Other interpretations followed, including the possibility that the Tabun-Skhul
samples were the actual missing evolutionary link between Neanderthals and
modern humans,        or alternatively that they represented hybrids between
separate contemporaneous Neanderthal and modern human populations. Yet
another variation was the suggestion that, if the material was early in date, it

