



                                                                                         H5
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              thus to concentrate on the raw materials used and the variety of edges produced
              by the many different techniques.
                From the artifact we will proceed to an examination of the Ancients' use of
              campsites. How were these organized? Is there any evidence for the systematic
              construction of hearths? What can we tell from the spatial patterning of stone
              and bone material? And what evidence is there for houses and shelters? At this
              level of analysis    we can also see the contribution of other animals, such as
              hyenas and bears, to the accumulation of animal bones in those locations used at
              other times by the Ancients.     We will also examine claims for the appearance of
              the   first   symbolic burials by the Neanderthals, and the arguments for the
              emergence of cultural behaviour e.g. the variation in the shape of stone tools to
              express cultural identity.
                From the campsite we will move out to the landscape. The Middle
              Palaeolithic world, like the      modern world, was highly varied in terms of
              habitats, food and natural resources (such as suitable stone for knapping), and
              we will study how these different landscapes were used by the different
              populations of Ancients. Obtaining raw materials and provisioning campsites
              with food are just two of the major aspects of Ancient life for which evidence
              has survived. The animal bones and stone tools which allow us to reconstruct
              such behaviour are pointers to that all-important human attribute: mobility.
              When we combine mobility with the ability to adjust group size to the season
              and the prevailing Pleistocene climate (Chapter 2) we have two of the most
              powerful means by which all hominids have survived. A third element, the
              forward planning through the storage of food and equipment, is also important,
              and a discussion of the evidence for all three - mobility, variations in group size
              and storage - will bring us closer to answering the question of how similar or
              not the survival behaviour of the Ancients was from that of the Moderns.
                 The final section of the chapter looks at the limits of the Ancients' world (fig.
              1). The Neanderthals were the first colonizers of certain habitats, such as the

              north European plain and the mountains of Central Asia. However, much of
              the Old World, and all of Australia and the Americas, remained uninhabited.
              By    considering the geographical extent of their territory, the range of
              environments they lived in, and the effect of climate on long-term occupation,
              we have another        line   of evidence for establishing similarities with and
              differences from ourselves.



              The chronology of the Middle Palaeolithic
              As we saw in Chapter 2, the middle Pleistocene was once described by Glyn
              Isaac as 'the muddle in the middle'. This unflattering term could have been
              applied with equal justification to the chronology of the Middle Palaeolithic
              (and its equivalent in Africa - the Middle Stone Age ). One reason for this was
                                                                     1
                                                                         '




              the lack of absolute dates for this period compared with the Lower Palaeolithic
              of East Africa (where Isaac worked) and the Upper Palaeolithic world-wide.
              But this is now changing and the chronological muddle is beginning to unravel.




146
                                                                      THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




  SO Some of the tools recovered from High Lodge in England. In apparent contradiction to
     traditional Palaeolithic chronologies, these implements are very Middle Palaeolithic in
appearance but have been dated to the Lower Palaeolithic, c. 500,000 years ago. a End scraper;
            b convergent scraper; c convex side scraper; d steep scraper or limace.



As it does so, however, we are discovering that some long cherished notions
about the ages of sites and stone tool industries will have to be rethought. 12
   The most fundamental issue to be challenged was the division between the
Lower and Middle Palaeolithic. As we discussed in Chapter 2, the Lower
Palaeolithic (best known in Europe through Acheulean industries) was
traditionally defined by the widespread occurrence of large bifacially worked
implements known as hand axes. These are usually of ovate or pointed form,
and scrapers are also common. The Middle Palaeolithic was characterized by
retouched (modified) tools such as scrapers, and hand axes in this period tended
to be rare. (The Mousterian is one such Middle Palaeolithic stone industry in
Europe, and     is   generally associated with the classic Neanderthals.)                The
concept, embodied in these definitions, of technological progress - whereby
tools gradually      became smaller and        finer   through time - has long been
abandoned. But few were expecting                it   to   be quite so comprehensively
overturned as it has been by recent work.


Chronological confusions in northwest Europe
The two English sites of High Lodge and Boxgrove in eastern and southern
England respectively were among the first to upset traditional beliefs.
Geological evidence suggests that these sites were two of the earliest in
England, dated according to the revised deep-sea chronology to about 500,000-
400,000 years old. Such antiquity implies they should belong to the Lower
Palaeolithic. But the flints found at High Lodge are very Middle Palaeolithic in
form.   They consist of well-struck flakes retouched into a limited range of
scraper and point forms (see figure above). And furthermore, hand axes are
missing. At Boxgrove the surprise is of a rather different nature. Hand axes were
found at this site, so there is no doubt about its traditional Lower Palaeolithic
credentials, but the axes are finely made ovates. Previously, such 'advanced'
artistry would have been assigned a much later date. 13

  Another site to upset traditional Palaeolithic chronologies was the site of
Pontnewydd Cave in north Wales. We saw in the box on pp. 58-59 that this site




                                                                                                  147
       THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                          has been dated to about 200,000 years ago. And yet the hand axes, cores and
                          flakes found at Pontnewydd are made on coarse-grained raw materials such as
                                                          14
                          rhyolites and volcanic tuffs.        The crude appearance of the hand axes would
                          once have suggested that they were much older than their actual date now
                          indicates.
                            At the opposite extreme is the open site of Swanscombe in the Thames
                          Valley. In the Barnfield pit site, a complex stratigraphy contains a series of river
                          loams and gravels with an interglacial age of      <:.   420,000— 360,000 years ago. 15
                          The lower loam contains no hand axes, but an assemblage of chopping tools and
                          thick irregular flakes. (This assemblage is known as Clactonian after similar

5/     A hard rock hand   material excavated from an old stream channel at the holiday resort of Clacton
axe,  made on a fine      on the east coast of England.) 16 There could hardly be any greater difference
siliceous tuff. About
                          than with the Acheulean industry from the upper loam, which contains many
200,000 years old,
and 12 cm tall, it mas    highly refined ovate hand axes. Both industries are probably much older than
excavated from            the coarse-looking Pontnewydd material.
Pontnewydd Cave.
                            The rich and complex site of La Cotte on Jersey (in the Channel Islands)
                          yielded similarly contradictory material to the traditional schemes. Dated to
                          about 238,000 years ago, 17 the site is dominated by flake tools such as side
                          scrapers. Hand axes are either rare or absent, while the Levallois technique (see
                          below) is common. Such artifactual evidence would firmly suggest that the site
                          belonged to the Middle Palaeolithic. Yet La Cotte is very similar in age to the
                          'Lower' Palaeolithic material from Pontnewydd, and it more closely resembles
                          the stone artifacts from High Lodge than the classic Lower Palaeolithic site of
                          Swanscombe, to which it is nearer in age.
                             These discoveries have made it very difficult to say exactly when the Middle
                          Palaeolithic began. We must realize that we are still trying to use a classification
                          that was devised some time ago with very different assumptions about how the
                          Pleistocene and the Palaeolithic were organized, assumptions determined in
                          large part by the limited techniques then available for dating sites of such
                          antiquity. Perhaps a term such as Earlier Palaeolithic - which combines the
                          Lower and Middle Palaeolithic of Europe prior to the Upper Palaeolithic,
                          40,000 years ago - should be adopted to avoid any further confusion that
                          absolute dates will bring (as they  become increasingly available) to the
                                                   18
                                               But for the sake of consistency with earlier discussions
                          traditional divisions.
                          in the book we shall continue to use the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic

                          terminology.
                            We will adopt the date of 250,000-200,000 years ago that many other
                          scholars now favour for the start of the Middle Palaeolithic. This date was
                          partly chosen because after this time hand axes appear to decline in numbers,
                          while a distinctive new method of preparing stone nodules to produce large
                          prepared flakes and blades - the Levallois technique (see box opposite) -
                          becomes much more common. The changeover was a slow process. Using the
                          long sequence from the granite headland site of La Cotte, Paul Callow has
                          argued that by 200,000 years ago the Middle Palaeolithic was firmly
                          established. During the 50,000 years over which this development took place,




       148
                                                       THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




     The Levallois and Disc Core Techniques of Flint Knapping


Levallois is a suburb of Paris, and it was here that archaeologists
first recognized the knapping technique   whereby the shape of the
flake is predetermined before it is struck off the core. Previously
tool makers had relied principally on chance to strike a well-suited
flake; the Levallois technique is considered by many to represent
an advance in tool technology because knappers now began to
control the shape of the flakes. The technique is often described as
an example of a prepared core approach to producing flakes and
occasionally blades (the latter defined as being twice as long as
they are wide). While one of the hallmarks of the later Upper
Palaeolithic, large blades made by the Levallois technique are also
found in the Middle Palaeolithic.
   The technique consisted of carefully preparing the nodule so that
one surface is domed. A striking platform (the surface to be struck)
is then prepared, on occasion elaborately. The flake/blade is then

struck off and the procedure is repeated until the core becomes too
small. Experiments by archaeologist Bruce Bradley have shown
                                                                         52 The Levallois
that from tabular blocks of flint measuring 4 x 15 cm, between 3 and     technique offlint-
8 flakes of predetermined dimensions could be struck. 19 Of course,      knapping: first the
many other flakes are removed at the same time. When exhausted,          nodule is prepared,
the core is sometimes described as a tortoise core on account of its     then a flake is struck.
shape. The scar of the last flake/blade removal is sometimes very
clear (fig. 52). Triangular points were commonly made using the
Levallois technique. These may well have been hafted (fig. 53).
   The Levallois technique is found widely throughout Europe, Asia
and Africa. Regional variants exist, such as the Victoria West cores             \ head
first identified in South Africa. These produced a large side struck
flake that would have been suitable for making hand axes or
                                                                                     -slot
cleavers. At the Wadi Haifa in Nubia, Anthony Marks describes a
special preparation technique involving bladelet removals to                         binding

detach predetermined flakes from pebble raw material (fig. 54). 20
   An alternative technique for producing flakes in the Middle
Palaeolithic involved the use of disc cores. These were not
prepared cores, but were instead rotated to obtain the correct           S3   A possible method
angles for flakes to be detached. The loss of predetermined flake        ofhafting a triangular
size was possibly compensated for by the greater number of               Levallois point.
serviceable flakes which could be knapped from an equivalent
lump of stone.
   The Levallois technique of core preparation is very different in
both approach and end product from the blade cores of the much
later Upper Palaeolithic. It is unlikely they indicate the same degree
of forward planning in tool manufacture.


54   Levallois versatility. Three
ways of preparing stone to make
different shaped blanks.
a Triangular point, b Transverse
Victoria West core, c Levallois
blade.




                                                                                                   149
   THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                      there are now absolute dates which             show a great deal of variability in the
                      composition of stone assemblages. It is impossible to see a clear sequence from
                      one tool industry to the next. Progress - with the implication of a relentless
                      drive to get better, faster - could not be a more inappropriate description.


                      The transition to the Middle Palaeolithic elsewhere
                      This variability is not confined to the British Isles. At the travertine site of
                      Ehringsdorf in eastern Germany, for instance, a date of about 225,000 years has
                      been assigned to an assemblage of stone tools that lacks both hand axes and
                                                    21
                      large bifacial tools. It contains instead a series of finely made, bifacially

                      worked points and scrapers. Before the site was given an absolute date, the
                      material was thought to be a likely ancestral industry - from the last interglacial
                      (i.e. c. 1 20,000     years ago) - for the later Mousterian. Now we can see that the
                      picture is    more complex. The stone industry from another travertine site,
                      Vertesszollos in Hungary, consists of small pebble tools and irregularly
                      retouched flakes. Such implements are usually considered 'crude' in compari-
                20
                      son with the Acheulean hand axes and prepared core techniques such as
                      Levallois. Consequently Vertesszollos is usually spoken of as a classic Lower
55 Chopping tools     Palaeolithic pebble tool site, and it was originally thought to be at least 350,000
from Tata, Hungary.
                      years old. 22        However, recent uranium-series dates indicate that the thick
                      travertines were laid down over a period of 50,000 years, between 210,000 and
                      160,000 years ago - in other words, much later than the 'refined' flake tool
                      assemblages from High Lodge and Ehringsdorf and the ovate and pointed hand
                      axe assemblages of sites such as Boxgrove and Swanscombe. (This appears to
                      conflict with some of the mammal remains, which indicate an earlier date.)
                         On the eastern edge of the Neanderthals' world (map pp. 10-11), in
                      Tadzhikistan in Central Asia, are the sites of Karatau and Lakhuti. Thermo-
                      luminescence dating of simple flakes and pebble tools from loesses at the two
                      sites   has   yielded         dates   of 194,000-210,000 and   150,000-130,000 years
                                       23
                      respectively. And to the south, in sub-Saharan Africa, a number of so-called
                      late Acheulean sites (meaning that large hand axes were still common) have

                      been dated e.g.         to     260,000 years ago at Isimila and 230,000 years ago   at

                      Kapthurin in northern Kenya. Desmond Clark has argued that the transition to
                      the Middle Palaeolithic/Middle Stone Age took place about 200,000 years ago
                      in Africa, since the site of Gademotta in the Ethiopian Lakes section of the East

                      African rift valley has a Middle Stone Age assemblage below a volcanic tuff
                      dated to about 235,000 years ago. 24


                      Diversity in the Middle Palaeolithic
                      The earliest Middle Palaeolithic that we have just reviewed was therefore a
                      period of transition. Within the period 250,000-200,000 years ago we find
                      considerable variety in the composition and technology of assemblages. This
                      variety   may arise partly from the differences in raw materials that were
                      available.    But      this    cannot be the whole explanation, since the Levallois
                      technique       is    employed on the coarse rocks of Pontnewydd Cave and




    150
                                                                    THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



throughout the volcanic areas of Africa, as well as in areas where fine-grained
flints and cherts are a readily available raw material.

  The diversity in the proportions of the different types of stone tools found in
Middle Palaeolithic assemblages, however, is based on only a very limited
range of tool types themselves. Hand axes, flakes, Levallois flakes and blades,
side scrapers, points, cores and pebble/chopping tools make up the bulk of the
artifactual material. Once established, the pattern of assemblage types appears
to continue throughout the period 200,000 to 130,000 years ago.
  The later Middle Palaeolithic in Europe lasts from about 130,000 to 35,000
years ago. It therefore spans the last interglacial and both climatic phases of the
early glacial (see table p. 45)           and coincides with the period of the classic
Neanderthals in southwest Europe and the Middle East. There is some overlap
with the earliest       Upper Palaeolithic industries, such as the Aurignacian
(Chapters 8 and 9), which appear by 40,000 years ago.                The period is also
marked by additional variety in the lithic material. Recent TL dating at
important French cave sites such as the Grotte Vaufrey, Combe Grenal, Le
Moustier and Pech de TAze has shown that these classic Mousterian assem-
blages belong in this later phase of the Middle Palaeolithic (Appendix i). 2S




        56 Tools from the later
        Middle Palaeolithic, a
        Micoquian knife or hand axe.
           b Alousterian of Acheulean
           Tradition knife or hand axe.


                                                                       100
                                                               mm


  The 100,000 years of the later Middle Palaeolithic also saw the introduction
of distinctively shaped stone tools whose chronological position                is   better
understood than the previous                       These include the small
                                            150,000 years.
Micoquian hand axes and knives and the classic triangular hand axes/knives
found in the later Middle Palaeolithic of England and France. In France, the
latter occur in assemblages known as the Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition

(MAT), so named because of the reappearance in a Middle Palaeolithic
(Mousterian) industry of large, hand axe-like implements similar to those that
characterize the Acheulean. Such assemblages can be dated to the early part of
the last glaciation after 75,000 years ago. The Micoquian, named after level 6
from the cave of La Micoque in southwest France, is widely used to describe a
variety of assemblages of this age in other parts of Europe.                 A number of
regional     variations    have    been recognized,      for   example the distinctive
asymmetrical knives from Bockstein Cave in southern Germany or the Pradnik
'knives' from Poland.




                                                                                                151
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                      New Research on Stone Tools: a Focus on Edges


                               The traditional typologies of the European Middle Palaeolithic treat
                               each tool type as a distinct artifact that the flint knapper had set out
                               to make. However, this takes no account of the retouching process.
                               Harold Dibble has recently shown that differences between tools
                               are in fact more accurately a measure of the continuous process of
                                                                       26
                               utilization and resharpening (fig. 57).    As the scraper is reduced in
                               size the retouch tends to get heavier and the piece passes,
                               typologically, from a straight-edged, single-sided scraper to a
                               convex form, and finally becomes a transverse scraper. The
                               biography of the implement is therefore determined by a host of
                               factors governing the intensity with which it was used and at what
      57 Drawing of a          stage it was thrown away.
      scraper, with the           As a result, the edges of a tool are now becoming more important
      previous stages of its   for understanding stone technology than its overall shape. In a
      production shown. The    study of Middle Palaeolithic collections from Spain, Michael Barton
      implement changes        concludes that irrespective of tool shape there were only two basic
      shape as a result of
                               edges. 27 The first are those found on notches and denticulates (fig.
      continuous retouch,
                               48). They are one-offs, expediently made and used, comparable to
      from a single-edged
                               the rare examples of Middle Palaeolithic burins and piercers. The
      side scraper to a
      transverse scraper.      second set of edges are found on points and scrapers they vary
                                                                                           ;




                               continuously in size and shape as a result of the nature and
                               intensity of their use.
                                 Instances of recycling raw materials have been noted by
                               scholars previously, 28 but only recently have they assumed
                               significance. For example, specialized resharpening is known from
                               La Cotte in Jersey where over 2,000 sharpening flakes have been
                               found. 29 Of these only one could be refitted back to the tool from
                               which it had been struck (fig. 58). 30 Recycled flakes are most
                               common in those assemblages at La Cotte where flint sources had
                               become rare due to such factors as rising sea levels.
                                 The link between a reduction technique and changes in the
                               environment at La Cotte warns us against a stolid view of Middle
                               Palaeolithic knappers - bound by tradition and limited in their
                               choices by low intellects. The idea that they held a mental template,


      58   A refitted
      sharpening flake
      from the Middle
      Palaeolithic site of
      La Cotte, Jersey.




152
                                                             THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




       a sort of knapper's blueprint, in their head when making tools is too
       simplistic. The range of tool types may have been limited and the
       proportions between assemblages repetitive, but the sequence of
       reduction was dynamic, related to a complicated web of decisions
       about survival. Furthermore, the demonstration by Lawrence
       Keeley and other experimental edge-wear specialists, that many
       'tools' were just sharp-edged, unmodified flakes has further
       questioned the significance of typological analysis for understand-
       ing behaviour.




Contradictions to traditional European chronologies
The Middle East and southern Africa, both occupied by the Ancients, have
provided quite a different picture of Middle Palaeolithic stone technology and
typologies. As we saw in Chapter 5, the Middle East has yielded evidence which
contradicts the long-established European association between hominid fossils
and types of stone tools. For many years European archaeologists believed that
Middle Palaeolithic stone tools would be made by Neanderthals and Upper
Palaeolithic implements by Cro-Magnon, modern people. That this theory can
no longer be supported is indicated by the discovery of a Neanderthal skeleton
at Kebara Cave in Israel and the anatomically modern skulls and skeletons from

the much older Qafzeh cave. Both sites, irrespective of their fossils, have
Middle Palaeolithic tools. 31
  A second contradiction to the European chronology of the Palaeolithic
concerns what tools were made when. In Europe the technological divisions
created for the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic had always assumed a measure
of advance,   if   not progress, from a flake-based to a blade-based stone
technology. Thus, Upper Palaeolithic blades were slender and lightweight,
often far   more than twice as long as they were wide           (the criterion for
distinguishing blades from flakes). In Europe, the division between the two
periods could be demonstrated stratigraphically by the many sites, such as La
Ferrassie or El Castillo, at which      Middle   Palaeolithic assemblages were
overlain by   Upper Palaeolithic industries. The Middle/Upper Palaeolithic
division was therefore a chronological statement about which technological and
typological system was older.
  But outside Europe this chronological distinction has never been so clear cut.
Ever since Dorothy Garrod's excavations at Tabun cave in Mount Carmel and
Alfred Rust's investigations of the Yabrud rockshelter in Syria it has been
apparent that the stone technology of the Upper Palaeolithic appears and
disappears in the long stratigraphies of these caves, well before the genuine
Upper Palaeolithic is established. 32 These assemblages are known as Amudian,
after the Wadi Amud where the same sequence has been found. Thus, blades

and some other Upper Palaeolithic tool types appear in the archaeological




                                                                                         153
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                  Sg Pre- Upper Palaeolithic tools from north and south Africa.
                                  a Awl burin (north Africa), b Notched blade (north Africa).
                                       c,d Backed blades, probably hafted (south Africa).




              record at these          sites,   only to be followed by thick deposits of Middle
              Palaeolithic,       Mousterian assemblages, often with heavy use of the Levallois
              technique. A similar pattern occurred at the Libyan cave of Haua Fteah, while
              at a corresponding latitude (but 7,600              km to the south) the huge deposits in the
              caves at Klasies River Mouth also contain a rich Upper Palaeolithic blade
              technology stratified within             a    long Middle Stone Age sequence. 33 This
              assemblage, known as the Howiesons Poort, was not only dominated by blades
              made on stone imported some distance from the site, but also contained
              geometric microliths, including triangles and trapezes which some believe were
              most probably hafted as barbs in arrows. 34 These microliths are dated to
              between 50,000 and 70,000 years ago. The contrast between this assemblage
              and the flake technologies of the under- and over-lying Middle Stone Age is
              very marked indeed.
                   Avraham Ronen has              called    the   various   early   appearances of Upper
              Palaeolithic technology the            pre-Upper Palaeolithic, or PUP for short. The
              dating of these assemblages              is   not always definite, but most of them are
              probably of a similar age to the PUP at Klasies River Mouth. Which type of
              hominid or hominids made them is uncertain (Chapter 8). But what is clear is
              that the stone-working techniques of the Upper Palaeolithic, far from sweeping
              the board as they did in            Europe after 40,000 years ago, elsewhere met an
              indifferent or short-lived response when first used at an earlier time. Of course,
              this discovery really tells us            most about the way we believe             Palaeolithic
              technology should change i.e. from crude to fine, with the assumption that what
              is   closest   in    time to the present must be an advance.                  The widespread
              phenomenon of the              PUP provides us with an alternative to traditional
              classification of the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic. Another alternative is to
              consider the variation between assemblages of stone tools not so much in the
              broad terms of Middle and Upper Palaeolithic technology and typology, but
              instead in relation to their function (see box on p. 152).



              CAMPSITES
              The main characteristic of the Ancients' campsites is a negative one: the lack of
              features. Until well into the later Middle Palaeolithic, some 60,000 years ago,




154
                                                                   THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                Settlement Types



       A model of Middle Palaeolithic settlement was first put forward 20
       years ago by Lewis and Sally Binford. 35 They argued that the
       starting point for understanding the limited variability in        assem-
       blages of Mousterian stone tools, as revealed by Bordes (pp. 144-
       45), must be to view them as components in a regional system. The
       model which they proposed was very simple. Settlements were
       divided into two main types: base camps, where food was prepared
       and consumed, and tools manufactured and repaired; and work
       camps, where food and raw materials were obtained. They argued
       for the mobility of Middle Palaeolithic people in the landscape since
       food resources were not evenly distributed, and would vary not only
       in the long term as climate changed but also seasonally. This
       mobility produced a third type of camp, the overnight stop.
          The originality of their approach lay in testing this model by
       analysing the combination of tool types in Mousterian assem-
       blages. Their study is known as a functional approach since they
       assigned functions to the tools before carrying out a computer-
       assisted factor analysis on the material from a small number of
                                             36
       sites in Europe and the Middle East. Their analysis suggested that
       base camps could be identified with two of Bordes' five Mousterian
       groups whereas those assemblages dominated by denticulate
       tools and side scrapers (fig. 48) were the result of activities carried
       out at work camps. 37




there is an absence of such obvious campsite items as structured hearths (rather
than just a concentration of ash), post holes for tents, pits for storage, or
trenches from house construction.
  In   northern   Europe there        are   a   number of      sites   with   exceptional
preservation. These include Biache-St-Vaast in northeast France, Maastricht-
Belvedere in the Netherlands, and the English              sites   of Boxgrove, Hoxne,
Clacton and the loams at Swanscombe. But what is striking about all these sites
which have bones and stone tools in primary contexts, is how unstructured they
appear.   Nowhere do we        find    built    hearths,   pits,   post   holes   or   even
arrangements of stones and bones as windbreaks. Poor preservation cannot be
blamed, because these sites are better preserved than many from the much later
Bronze i\ge or Roman periods. Yet campsites stubbornly refuse to be found. As
Catherine Farizy has concluded, the uniform nature of remains at these sites
suggests that only a limited range of activities was carried out. 38 She believes
that behaviour at this time did not link different functions to different places.
  'Site' therefore   becomes an inappropriate term to describe such unstruc-
tured locations. They are pieces of the landscape which happen to have had a




                                                                                               155
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                       60 Some of the earliest known constructed hearths, dating from the end of
                   the Middle Palaeolithic,have recently been excavated at Vilas Ruivas in Portugal.




              higher than average number of flints and bones deposited upon them. The only
              patterns we can safely interpret are the activities of butchering animals and
              stone knapping, where we can, on occasion, see where the person knelt from the
              spaces in the waste flakes they left behind. In the case of the latter activity, it
              was very much a 15-minute culture that lasted in Europe for at least half a
              million years.
                While substantial hearths are absent, thick ash deposits, burnt bone and
              charcoal are very common in both open and cave sites. x\sh deposits are found
              throughout the Klasies sequence in South Africa where many layers with ash
              lenses occur, and similar evidence for burning is known from La Cotte in the
              Channel Islands and Vertesszollos in Hungary. Archaeologist Ofer Bar-Yosef
              makes the same observation for the Levantine sites. 39 Middle Palaeolithic
              people it seems had fire but they did not build elaborate hearths. The most
              complex hearths consisted of small scoops in the cave floor.
                 The first examples of features and structures at the Ancients' campsites
              come towards the end of the Middle Palaeolithic about 60,000 years ago. A
              well-built hearth has been excavated by Luis Raposo at Vilas Ruivas in
              Portugal. 40 It is associated with a late Mousterian tool assemblage. Hearths of
              similar age are known from the multi-level sites of Molodova on the Dnestr




156
                                                                    THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                          (7              ^o
                                                     V




          6/   y4 Mousterian level at Molodova yielded piles of mammoth bones that
           are thought once to have formed part of a very early hut or windbreak.




River in Russia, although they are not stone-built. 41 However, their frequency
in a single occupation horizon and their novel association with                 windbreaks
made from piles of mammoth bones is worth noting.
  The artificial structures at Molodova are the earliest yet documented which
have stood the test of critical scrutiny. There have been many claims for older
huts and cabins but none are convincing. Perhaps the best                    known is the
supposed series of huts with internal hearths that Henry de Lumley excavated
                               42
at Terra Amata in Nice.             Work on refitting the flints by Paola Villa has shown
that the site was more disturbed than previously thought. 43 Inspection of the
few published plans reveals an all too familiar low-density scatter of stone and
animal bone with localized patches of burning. These are most definitely not a
series of beach huts as so commonly speculated. 44

  There are other ways to examine the fireside differences in the behaviour of
the Ancients. At the Grotte Vaufrey in France, Jan Simek has investigated the
patterns revealed by the meticulous excavations undertaken by Jean-Philippe
Rigaud. 45 A lens 8 cm thick found in level VIII contains a rich Mousterian
assemblage, dated to more than 132,000 years ago. The artifacts and bones
form clusters around a rock fall. The lack of hearths results in very little formal
structure and no focus for activity. The contents of these clusters of material are




                                                                                                157
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              very repetitive (unlike those in the Upper Palaeolithic levels at the nearby site
              of Le Flageolet), and may point to the repeated occupation of the shelter by a
              small group. Simek interprets the Grotte Vaufrey patterns according to Lewis
              Binford's theory that Middle Palaeolithic foragers frequently moved their
              residential base camps,   whereas Upper Palaeolithic peoples operated out of
              permanently occupied home bases and only used rockshelters as special
              purpose sites to exploit strategic resources (see box on p. 155).
                Two other issues about Middle Palaeolithic campsites need to be discussed.
              These are the much debated topics of art and burial, and the extent to which
              they were practised by the Ancients.



              Burials

              The     so-calledMiddle Palaeolithic burials only occurred consistently in
              Europe, the Middle East and Central Asia. 46 Just one has been unambiguously
              identified in Africa: the child burial at Border Cave, which may be as old as
              80,000 years. None come from open sites. Strictly speaking it is more accurate
              to refer to these finds as complete or nearly complete skeletons rather than
                                                                                       47
              burials, however closely they seem to foreshadow current practice.            What is
              most interesting about the distribution of these finds is their concentration in
              western Europe and the Middle East (fig. 1). The greatest number occur in
              southwest France, with a notable outlier at Spy in Belgium. The only fairly
              complete skeleton ever to come from central Europe was the first from the
              Feldhofer Cave in the Neander Valley, found as we have seen by workmen in
              1856. Elsewhere in central and eastern Europe the Neanderthal material is
              fragmentary - bits of skull and limb bones. At Kiik-Koba in the Crimea, two
              bodies - an adult male and infant - were found during excavations between
              1924 and 1926. Let us now conduct a brief survey of the evidence for burials.
                In the Middle East fairly complete bodies have been excavated at Kebara,
              Tabun, and Amud, and modern humans at Qafzeh and Skhul. In Iraq, the cave
              site   of Shanidar has produced a series of important Neanderthal remains,
              including the one referred to as the flower burial (fig. 62). 48 The pollen grains in
              the sediments surrounding the body were interpreted as garlands of flowers
              strewn across the corpse. But not everyone believes this interpretation,
              preferring instead the    more prosaic explanation that the grains percolated
              through the sediments or were deposited by animal burrowing. 49
                 Further east at Teshik Tash, horn cores of the Siberian mountain goat were
              found with their points apparently driven into the ground around the partial
              skeleton of a child. Whether this was to protect the corpse from scavengers or
              represented some rite is still open to question. Indeed, wild goat is the most
              abundant species in the faunal remains from the site and the association
              between the skeleton and the horn cores may be entirely fortuitous.
                 None of the European burials are directly associated with red ochre, 50
              although some bodies in the Middle East have the occasional lump. 51 This
              pigment (an iron oxide or hematite) occurs naturally, and is undoubtedly




158
                                                                                                     .




                                                                        THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




62 Scholars are currently locked in debate as to whether these fairly complete skeletons represent
deliberate burials: a Kebara 2 Neanderthal; b Shanidar 4 Neanderthal; c Qafzeh 11
anatomically modern human.




associated with Upper Palaeolithic burials, for example the 'Red Lady' from
                                                                                                52
Paviland Cave in south Wales. It is thought to have had a symbolic function.
   Many of the Neanderthal bodies are in a crouched position, sometimes with
the head pillowed on an arm. Whether they were arranged or just died in their
sleep and were quickly covered over is difficult to determine. At La Ferrassie in
France there was no clear evidence for grave pits, although an adult male and
female were found head to head. 53 To make matters more difficult, many of
these finds were excavated a long time ago, when the accurate recording of
important details such as the sedimentological evidence for the presence of a
grave pit was not carried out.           The recent find at Saint-Cesaire shows no
evidence for a pit. The pit containing the Chapelle-aux-Saints body, on the
other hand, was very clear to the excavator, Abbe Bouyssonie, in 1908. Here
was an intentional burial, but whether it was a burial in the modern sense or
more akin to rubbish disposal is the point at issue. With other finds we have to
be more careful. Sometimes, and most notably at Le Moustier, a body was
buried and re-excavated several times to provide visiting dignitaries with the
                       54
thrill of discovery.        These stories, while rare, make it difficult to accept claims
for such grave goods as intentionally placed stone tools or joints of meat. The

goods are just as probably part of the general stone and bone assemblages rather
than have any special significance. However, the lower jaw of a wild boar was
apparently clasped in the hands of the anatomically modern burial of Skhul V,
while a fallow deer skull with antlers turned up in the hands ofthe Qafzeh 1 1 child
   Despite all the difficulties of interpretation, finding quite complete bodies is
of great interest, especially since they are very early in northern latitudes
(Chapter 3). But if they are not burials in the modern sense, what else could
account for the sudden increase in complete or near complete bodies? Clive
Gamble has recently pointed out that as a general rule, complete Neanderthal
skeletons have been found only in those regions where carnivores did not make




                                                                                                         159
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              great use of caves, indicated by the very small number of carnivore bones
              recovered from the sites. 55 Such sites are particularly common in Israel and
              southwest France (fig.    i),   for instance   Le Moustier, Tabun, Shanidar and
              Teshik Tash. In those areas of central and eastern Europe where finds of
              Neanderthals are very fragmentary (as at Ganovce in Czechoslovakia and
              Krapina and Vindija in Croatia), there are abundant carnivore remains either at
              the sites or in the general area. The presence in winter of bears digging their
              hibernation 'beds' in the cave floor and, in spring, of wolves and hyenas using
              the caves and rockshelters as dens, must have provided only a slim chance for
              the survival of complete bodies, irrespective of any protection - symbolic or
              practical - in the form of pits or a 'fence' of horns.
                   We argue therefore that Neanderthal burials appear when and where they do
              because of local shifts in carnivore behaviour away from using caves and
              rockshelters, and not as a consequence of the birth of symbolic behaviour. 56 It
              is noteworthy, for instance, that not one Neanderthal burial/complete body
              comes from an open site anywhere in Europe. Yet such open-site burials are
              common in the Upper Palaeolithic, when deep grave pits were dug (Chapter 9).
              It is also worth noting that in central Europe, where no Neanderthal cave

              burials have yet been found, there are open site burials dating to the Upper
              Palaeolithic, for instance at    Dolni Vestonice in Czechoslovakia. Carnivores
              were present during both periods          in   this   region.   We conclude that the
              preservation of complete bodies in open sites during the Upper Palaeolithic
              indicates a deliberate custom, closer in concept to what we regard as a burial
              than the Neanderthal practice, which was probably more akin simply to corpse
              disposal; in the latter instance, complete skeletons only survived in exceptional
              circumstances.



              Middle Palaeolithic art and symbolic expression
              Similar caution has to be exercised over the claims for art and ritual objects
              dating from the Middle Palaeolithic. Such items include a diverse collection of
              scratched and polished bones, as well as pierced objects (see table opposite).
              Among the latter are some reindeer phalanges (toe bones) which have a neat
              hole in them. E. Lartet and H. Christy interpreted these bones as whistles as
              long ago as 1864, but it has since been pointed out many times that such
              perforations are almost certainly due to gnawing by carnivores.
                   Other items in the list are not easily explained away by butchery marks or
              accidental happenings. But whatever caused them, they remain a very small
              and heterogeneous sample. 58 This fact alone makes it difficult to assess claims
              such as those by Alexander Marshack that the pieces with zigzag scratches from
              Pech de l'Aze and Bacho Kiro (pi. 92) prefigure an entire code of symbolic
                                                                                     59
              motifs that became widespread later in the Upper Palaeolithic.              Some of the
              Middle Palaeolithic marks may well have been made intentionally, but they
              most probably lacked any symbolic rationale. We believe they should be
              compared in this respect to the repeated shapes of hand axes, scrapers and




160
                                                                     THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS


Site                   Object                           Industry              Age (years ago)
La Quma                Drilled fox tooth                Mousterian
La Quina               Pierced reindeer phalanx         Mousterian
La Ferrassie           Bone with fine incised           Mousterian
                       parallel lines
Bacho Kiro             Bone with engraved zigzags       Mousterian            > 43,000
Tata                   Mammoth molar lamellar,          Mousterian            116,000-78,000
                       modified
Pech de I'Aze          Rib fragment with incised        Acheulean             123,000-103,000
                       lines
Pech de I'Aze          Pierced bone fragment            Mousterian
Cueva Morin            Bone fragment with incised       Mousterian
                       lines
Sclayn                 Bear tooth with grooves          Middle Palaeolithic
Berekhat Ram           ?? Figurine                      Acheulean             > 230,000
Kebara                 Incised bones                    Mousterian
Klasies River Mouth    Bone with parallel grooves       Middle Stone Age
Klasies River Mouth    Ribs with serrated edges         Middle Stone Age


6j Examples of early symbolism? Listed here are Middle Palaeolithic artifacts with apparently
               deliberate marking; probable ages, when available, are given.




Levallois points. There is no reason to suppose that such limited, repetitious
forms were determined by symbolic codes; instead, we argue, they probably
simply resulted from imitation, as one Ancient learnt the art of stone knapping
by copying another. We will return to this important debate about the birth of
symbolic behaviour in Chapter 9, where we will discuss early language.



LANDSCAPE
A key issue in our understanding of the Ancients during the Middle
Palaeolithic regards the extent of their organizational complexity. How did
they make a living in the prevailing open environments? Were they as complex
as modern fisher-hunter-gatherers or did they have very different strategies of
survival? Archaeologists often believe that if they can resolve the question of
how subsistence was obtained, they will have a clearer understanding of the
general behavioural capabilities of the Ancients.
     At present, however, there            is   no consensus about the subsistence of
Neanderthals. The results can be used to support arguments for either hunting
or scavenging, or - as we suggest here - a combination of both strategies. What
we would like to know is how the Neanderthals varied in complexity and degree
of organization and planning from Upper Palaeolithic foragers. This question
is   currently the focus of much research, particularly with the analysis of
associated animal bones (see box overleaf). Nevertheless, one point on which
most scholars do agree is that, in the northern world of the Neanderthals, the
exploitation of plant foods       formed only a minor component in subsistence
(Chapter 2).
     Before we discuss such complex issues, it is first of all necessary to define the
slippery     terms,   hunting and scavenging. For our purposes, hunting                        is




                                                                                                    161
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                               Some Examples of 'Hunting' by the Ancients


                    Archaeologists all too frequently discuss hunting simply as an
                    exercise in killing. What is more, the social prestige today
                    associated with hunting often means that Palaeolithic hunting is
                    regarded as evidence for more complex behaviour than scaveng-
                    ing. We believe, however, that it is far more useful to look at both
                    strategies in terms of planning, mobility, group size and storage, for
                    analysis of the organization involved in provisioning campsites can
                    often reveal much more information than a straightforward quanti-
                    tative study of animal bones. Indeed, we will show that many
                    cherished notions about specialist and big-game hunting fail to
                    stand up to a broader approach to the evidence. 60
                       Specialist hunting undoubtedly existed in the Middle Palaeo-
                    lithic. At the Channel Island site of La Cotte, for instance, two piles of

                    bones containing mammoth and rhino were found preserved
                    beneath a rock overhang in Middle Palaeolithic levels dated to
                    180,000 years ago (fig. 64). Katherine Scott interpreted the bones as
                    the result of hunting drives across the granite headland. And at
                    Combe Grenal in France, Francois Prat and -more recently- Philip
                    Chase examined in detail the changes in animal species during the

         <3==>




                    64   Two piles of bones were excavated beneath the shelter of a rock overhang at
                    La Cotte; they are thought to be the result of a hunting drive. Here, in level 3,
                    the remains included parts of at least seven mammoths and two woolly rhinos.




162
                                                         THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                 61
last interglacial/glacial cycle.    Here, levels dating to the temperate
phase contained large numbers of red deer, whereas the dominant
species in later strata, about 75,000 years ago, was the reindeer.
Chase interprets these data as evidence for specialist hunting
governed by climatic controls on animal numbers.
   But the presence of a single dominant species does not always
signify the pursuit of specialist hunting. For example, the Hortus
cave in southern France (excavated by Henry de Lumley) was the
site of a narrow fissure containing animal bones, fragmentary
Neanderthal remains and a Mousterian industry. The animal bones
were dominated by ibex, and the location of the site beneath a large
                                                                       62
cliff has led scholars to interpret it as a specialist hunting camp.

But the cave fissure was also used by lynxes and leopards, and
later as a hibernation den by cave bear. The large quantities of ibex
bones might therefore have been deposited there by the big cats
rather than by specialist Neanderthal hunters.
   Similar doubts have been voiced about the open-air Mousterian
                                                        63
site of Erd in Hungary, excavated by Gabori-Csank.         Here the rich
animal fauna was dominated by cave bear, leading researchers to
propose that the site was geared in particular to hunting these
huge, dangerous omnivores. However, the presence of bones from
new-born bear cubs strongly suggests that it was also a hibernation
site (possibly an earth or snow bank den), meaning that the Middle
Palaeolithic artifacts may have related to entirely different animals
in the deposits.
  Much more convincing as specialist hunting sites are the open-
air sites recently discovered in southwest France. At one of these,
La Borde in the Lot valley, the remains of Bos primigenius (aurochs
or primitive cattle)  make up 93 per cent of the animal bones.
Females and young were hunted at different times throughout the
year. On the other hand, carnivores were very rare, causing the
excavators to infer well-planned and systematic hunting on the part
of the Neanderthals, who were killing these animals during a
temperate phase, possibly 120,000 years ago. 64
   So what about big-game hunting? While there are innumerable
artists' reconstructions of Neanderthals throwing rocks at mam-
moths and killing adult male bison and woolly rhinos with flimsy-
looking spears and gnarled clubs, we believe there is scant
evidence that this was either a regular occurrence or the likely
method of killing such large animals. The long sequences spanned
by sites in the Middle East contain evidence that medium- and
small-sized animals formed the mainstay of hunting strategies from
the Middle through to the end of the Upper Palaeolithic. As Ofer Bar-
Yosef has summarized, the presence at some sites of large animals
such as Bos primigenius and megafauna like rhino and hippo is
probably the result of scavenging. 65 Opportunities for such activi-
ties must have been common, but were not always seized upon due
to constraints of time, labour and - conversely - the availability of
hunting staples such as red deer, horse, gazelle and fallow deer.




                                                                                     163
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                  ^ Such was the case at Combe Grenal, where the Neanderthals
                     focused their attention on the smaller herd animals such as horse,
                     red deer and reindeer.
                        As the table on p. 53 indicates, small animals were available at all
                     sites; species of large prey varied across the Neanderthal world. It
                     is clear that, wherever possible, small animals were preferred;

                     hunting of megafauna was not the norm. This conclusion is
                     supported by the massive bone structure and repeated stress
                     fractures on several Neanderthal skeletons (Chapter 4), which
                     suggests that these hominids were involved in close-quarter killing
                     of medium to small herd species, rather than a showdown with a
                     4-ton mammoth. 66
                        In summary, evidence for the subsistence strategies of the
                     Neanderthals is still far from clear. Animals of various sizes were
                     being killed and some of these, as at La Borde, were hunted in a
                     manner that implies a degree of planning and organization rather
                     than a chance encounter. In other instances, however, such
                     specialist hunting cannot as yet be disentangled from the activities
                     of other animals - such as wolves and hyenas - that accumulate
                     bones.




              concerned not so much with        killing   animals as with planning. Neither      is

              scavenging just about picking up bits of dead animals. Both hunting and
              scavenging involve making decisions about where to move in the landscape in
              order to stand the best chance of intercepting game, dead or alive. The planning
              involves thinking ahead in terms of making and using technology.                 Most
              importantly, hunting in northern latitudes has to take into account those lean
              seasons of the year when prey migrate elsewhere. An alternative to using the
              natural stores from animal mortalities as they occur during the winter is to
              make a living from stores built up artificially after successful hunts at other
              times of the year. This would mean intensive processing, as well as the
              provision of storage facilities for caches of meat. In organizational terms, the
              end result would be greater security and the opportunity to occupy areas where
              natural mortalities alone were not sufficiently plentiful to sustain seasonal
              foraging for frozen meat. Such planning, if the Ancients possessed it, would
              qualify as complex behaviour.
                It is reasonable to expect that forward planning will be reflected as     much in
              the record of settlement location as in the types and ages of the hunted animals
              and the parts which were brought back to feeding sites. The degree of planning
              depth has been isolated by Lewis Binford as the key to understanding the
                                                                                   67
              different archaeological records of the Ancients and Moderns.
                A fully planned hunting strategy depends on far-flung social contacts. These
              can serve several purposes. Networks of obligation and partnerships are
              established by exchanging goods and gifts, objects which then represent a form




164
                                                            THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



of social storage against future hardships. During local food shortages, for
example, foraging groups can obtain vital resources from the more fertile
neighbouring territories occupied by kin or exchange partners. Contacts can
also provide other commodities, such as marriage partners. These networks of
exchange, therefore, are part of a much wider survival strategy essential in a
harsh environment. In fact, people are often bound together by widespread
systems of alliance which extend        well   beyond the geographical      limits

maintained simply through visiting and personal contact.



A regional example of Neanderthal subsistence
How can we analyse or quantify the subsistence strategies of scavenging and
hunting? In particular, can we take advantage of the presence of carnivores in
the same sites to learn something about Neanderthal behaviour?
  We believe that bones alone (see box above) will not give us the whole
picture; a wider, landscape   approach to the question needs to be adopted
instead. The region is the appropriate unit for examining subsistence since it
was at this level that resources were distributed, and the Neanderthals - as well
as other Ancients   - had to match their group size and mobility to the
predictability, abundance and seasonal availability of food.
  The example we have chosen will also demonstrate the advantages of a
regional, landscape approach to that crucial question of the depth of planning
displayed by the Ancients. The study, by Mary Stiner and Steven Kuhn, is of
two Neanderthal cave sites on the Tyhhrenian coast of west-central Italy:
Guattari Cave at Monte Circeo and the Grotta di Sant'Agostino near Gaeta. 68
Stiner and Kuhn demonstrate that it is possible to reconstruct patterns of both
scavenging and hunting at these sites. But their study also emphasizes that, in
the end, such definitions are less important for understanding Neanderthal
behaviour than are the insights (afforded by the transportation and selection of
animal carcasses and stone materials) into the degree of planning exercised by
these hominids as they provisioned their cave sites.
  Stiner conducted an examination of animal bones, and found very different
patterns at the two sites. The upper levels at Guattari (levels i and 2) contained
many gnawed animal bones and a head and hooves assemblage characteristic of
animal scavengers, clearly indicating that the cave had been a hyena den, rarely
visited by humans. In the lower levels 4 and 5, on the other hand, there were
fewer gnaw marks on the bones and not many hyena bones, suggesting that at
this time the cave was little used as a den. But the assemblage is still dominated

by heads, which leads Stiner to argue that when it came to choosing which parts
of the carcass to transport to the cave from a scavenging location, the Guattari
Neanderthals behaved in a similar manner to hyenas.          The Sant'Agostino
bones, however, indicate that a very different strategy was being followed by
the Neanderthals.    Here, red and fallow deer were hunted rather than
scavenged, and most of the carcass was transported back to the cave. Cut marks
on the bones outnumber carnivore tooth scratches.




                                                                                        165
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                The different patterns of faunal remains at the sites suggest that these
              Neanderthals varied the strategies they used to obtain food. They were neither
              dedicated specialist hunters nor specialist scavengers, neither opportunists nor
              careful strategic planners. Rather, they pursued a goal of subsistence security
              and met this with a range of behavioural solutions. They may not have used
              storage to reduce the risk of subsistence failure, but the fact that they moved
              around the landscape, making different decisions about what food to move
              where and at what time of the year, does suggest that the Neanderthals were
              able to plan to a certain degree.
                The faunal evidence can also provide clues as to the detailed behaviour of the
              Neanderthals. For instance, Stiner studied the question of why head and
              hooves assemblages should exist at all, since these parts of the carcass are
              usually poor in meat. Moreover, heads with horns and antlers are very bulky
              and heavy to carry any distance. 69 Stiner deduced that the Neanderthals were
              under great nutritional stress, scavenging those parts of the carcass which still
              contained vital fat reserves. During the lean winter seasons, animals in poor
              condition use up the fat reserves from their body and marrow. These are first
              depleted from the legs and trunk, while the head retains its fat resources longer
              in order to support brain functions. Even an animal that has died of starvation
              will have some remnant fat supplies in its skull. This is probably the resource

              the Neanderthals were after.




                                             Northern Foragers


                     Let us consider the problems faced by northern foragers. Here the
                     main survival problem facing the Ancients was how to get through
                     the winter since they did not create stores of food. One solution
                     might have been as follows.
                       The large animal communities of glacial northern Europe
                     (Chapter 2) would have experienced a high rate of natural attrition.
                     Starvation, old age, accidents and carnivore kills would have
                     annually resulted in a heavy cull of species ranging in size from
                     woolly mammoths to saiga antelope. One survival strategy for the
                     Ancients would have been foraging for and scavenging parts of
                     large carcasses from the open tundras. When the natural mortality
                     of these animals coincided with cold conditions, the carcasses
                     would freeze. The frozen mammoths, horses, bison and many other
                     species preserved for many millennia in the permafrost of Siberia
                     and the Yukon show that the meat is edible, if you hold your nose,
                     once the carcasses have melted. Obviously the Neanderthals
                     would have had to have found them long before they were frozen
                     into the land surface, and no doubt most of the time the hominids
                     would only find carcasses that had already been partially devoured
                     by carnivores. The pay-off for searching for such resources during
                     the lean months of a long glacial winter (when the herds of horse,




1   66
                                                                 THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                     REGIONAL
                   SETTLEMENT                             ARCHAEOLOGY




                                                             High        Low
       /         Local group area                 Scatters    M M
        •   '•   Scavenging location              Caves
        *        Summer hunting location                   Density of artifacts
       -n-       Cave/shelter
       ,-'**
                 Zone of winter mortalities


65   The concentration of artifacts in some caves and river valleys in the cold
northern world of the Neanderthals seems to be directly related to the location of
food. This suggests that stone tools (represented in the archaeological record
either as scatters across the landscape or as denser patches in caves and foraging
locations) were used and discarded most frequently at the spots where food was
regularly to be found. Compare this with the pattern at southern sites (fig. 6g).



red deer and reindeer had migrated far away to their winter grazing
grounds) would have been that these frozen carcasses were
uncontested. Even hyenas with their massive bone-crushing jaws
could not get at them once they were frozen. The control of fire by
humans would allow them to defrost and use such resources.
   This might explain why caves were used over and again for brief
visits. They were not necessarily home bases, but rather some-
where to build a fire, raise the temperature and defrost such
resources; well-built hearths, lined with stones, were not a
requirement for such thawing. This may account for the repeated
use of La Cotte and many other cave and rockshelter sites in the
glacial northern latitudes. These fixed points in the landscape were
simply places to transport food for further processing, as Stiner has
also suggested following her study of animal heads brought back to
the Grotta Guattari. To succeed, the strategy required that sufficient
quantities of megafauna consistently died in some parts of the
landscape. Finding them depended on nothing more than mobile
search parties and the ability to bring the right number of people
together to match the type and amount of food that had been found.
Using these natural stores might well have provided an important
way of getting through the winter, only returning to close-quarter
hunting when the all-important herds appeared again in the spring.
Rather than referring to such behaviour as scavenging, with has
connotations of merely ekeing out an existence, we prefer to see it
as foraging for fixed resources where searching skills were
paramount. 70 An alternative strategy, possibly adopted by southern
foragers, is discussed on pp. 172-73.




                                                                                             167
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



                Since it takes some time to break open animal heads and extract the food
              within, they were transported back to a refuge such as Guattari Cave. These
              terminal fat reserves would have had a special significance for pregnant females
              and children, particularly during the winter when often all that was available
              would have been natural animal mortalities. We have seen no evidence that the
              Ancients adopted any alternative, more complex solution to the problem of
              seasonal shortages such as the creation of stores of meat, marrow and grease
              from well-planned hunting (when animals would have been intercepted at
              known locations). 71 Their campsites are devoid of the elementary features
              associated with survival strategies of this kind.
                The faunal assemblages at the sites of Guattari and Sant'Agostino were
              consistently related either to scavenging or hunting. This suggests that during
              the Middle Palaeolithic, the two subsistence strategies took place in different
              parts of the landscape. Further analysis may reveal that the different foraging
              patterns were determined by gender. For instance, female groups may have
              been responsible for scavenging, while the males obtained most of their food by
              hunting; both sexes would have been responsible for feeding themselves. This,
              however, is still highly speculative.
                Whatever the explanation        for   such patterns, the contrast with faunal
              material from the later Upper Palaeolithic sites is very marked. For it is quite
              clear that the Moderns, presumably the males, were provisioning their camps
              with both hunted and scavenged material. The caves may have been occupied
              throughout a season or for much shorter periods of time, but they were
              certainly a form of 'home base'. In the Middle Palaeolithic, however, such base
              camps did not exist; the group, perhaps split into males and females, fed itself
              and moved on. The short, expedient nature of Middle Palaeolithic occupation
              probably explains why Guattari and Sant'Agostino only contain evidence for
              either scavenging or hunting.
                Simply   to   classify   the Neanderthals as either hunters or scavengers,
              however, would be to miss much potential information about their regional
              organization. Conditions throughout the Ancients' world were diverse, and
              they were met with a variety of solutions (some of which are considered in the
              boxes on pp. 167 and 172-73). It is clear that the Neanderthals could plan, but
              only with limited depth and provision for the future.       They relied on the
              abundance of prey, dead or alive, rather than clever technology to increase their
              chances of success against less predictable resources. The intricate matching of
              personnel to resources in the highly seasonal habitats of glacial Europe seems to
              have been beyond their organizational abilities; their modern successors, on the
              other hand, sent small work parties to specific points in the landscape in order
              to take advantage of less important foods as they briefly became available. Such
              an elaborate planning system would work only if the returns from separate
              foraging parties were stored and shared at a future date.      We can find no
              evidence that either the Neanderthals or the other Ancients were capable of
              such complex behaviour.




168
                                                                THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



Landscapes and raw materials

Materials can often be identified to particular sources, so it is possible to trace
the distances over which objects have been transported. The analysis of raw
materials and the manufacture of stone tools can therefore provide another way
of investigating how the Neanderthals and other Ancients used the landscape.
We will illustrate our discussion, again, with reference to the Italian study. But
let us first examine in general terms the relations between artifacts and their raw

materials.



The Dibble and Rolland model of tool manufacture
Archaeologists Harold Dibble and Nicholas Rolland have recently constructed
a simple model to predict the effect of distance from source on the manufacture

and use of stone tools. 72 They decided to take a fresh look at the five Mousterian
assemblages from southwest France first examined by Francois Bordes (see box
pp. 144-45). It will be recalled that Bordes believed the differences between the
Middle     Palaeolithic   assemblages   to   result   from   five   different   cultural
traditions.   Dibble and Rolland, however, suggest that raw material played a
greater role.
   When raw material is close at hand, they argue, artifacts are less well
finished. Tools are made when they are needed and soon thrown away; this is
known as an expedient technology. Where some effort has been expended in
obtaining suitable raw material from a distance, on the other hand, the extra
'cost' is reflected in the larger numbers of retouched or recycled implements: a

so-called curated technology. With this model in mind, let us now return to
Stephen Kuhn's analysis of the Italian Middle Palaeolithic.



Stone tools and land use in Italy
The lithic assemblages from Guattari and Sant'Agostino are part of a well-
known regional industry known as the Pontinian. The closest source for large
flints   was at least 50 km (31 miles) from the two caves, so their Middle
Palaeolithic inhabitants tended to rely on the locally available small, rolled flint
pebbles. Access to these was somewhat easier at Guattari so - in accordance
with the Dibble/Rolland model - one would expect this to be reflected in the
extent to which the cores were worked into implements. Kuhn found that this
was indeed the case, with a higher frequency of casually worked cores at this site
than at Sant'Agostino. Unexpectedly, however, the availability of the flint
pebbles seemed to have no influence on the intensity with which tools were
retouched or further modified. Indeed, the number of retouched tools                  is

actually lower at Sant'Agostino, where raw material was not present on site.
Kuhn's results are presented in the table overleaf. 73
  Kuhn deduced that the frequency with which tools were retouched must
have been more closely related to the sorts of activities for which they were
being used than the distance of a site from the closest source of flint. The




                                                                                            169
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS


                                               Guattari               Guattari            Sant'Agostino
                                               levels 1 & 2           levels 4 & 5        all   levels

               Age (years ago)                 c.57,000               c.76,000            43,000-55,000

               Duration of Neanderthal         Very short             Probably short      Relatively long
               occupations

               Animal parts brought            Heads and hooves       Heads               All   body parts
               back to the cave

               Neanderthal subsistence         Unknown                Scavenging          Hunting and some
                                                                                          scavenging
               Season of human use             Unknown                Unknown             Winter

               Carnivore use                   Hyena den              Slight              Wolf den in spring

               Reduction of tools              Moderate/light         Heavy               Light

               Frequency of retouch            Moderate               High                Low
               on tools

               Frequency of transported        Moderate               Low                 Low
               artifacts


                           66 Patterns of hunting and artifact use at Guattari and Sant'Agostino: a
                                             summary of the Stiner-Kuhn studies.



              different patterns of tool wear can therefore tell us something about the role of a
              site within a larger system of land use.

                As we have seen, Sant'Agostino yielded the remains of fairly complete
              animal carcasses which strongly suggest that its inhabitants were involved in
              hunting. Evidence also indicates that the cave was occupied for relatively long
              periods, meaning that raw materials could have been stockpiled at the site, thus
              counteracting the influence of absolute distance to the source. Kuhn surmised,
              therefore, that the Neanderthals at Sant'Agostino made relatively short sorties
              from the cave, during which they could obtain raw materials at relatively little
              cost, thus accounting for the infrequent and light retouch of tools at the site.
              The scarcity of faunal material at Guattari 4 and 5, on the other hand, suggests
              that its Neanderthal occupants would have depended less on hunted material
              and more on gathered resources such as plants and shellfish. The manufacture
              of wooden implements needed to collect such foods often involved heavy-duty
              stone tools which required frequent resharpening.                  The high level of tool
              modification at Guattari might therefore relate to the subsistence strategy of
              gathering and scavenging adopted by the Neanderthals living there. Such a
              conclusion is supported by the nature of the tools themselves, which are thick
              and large in comparison to the thin, delicate flakes found at Sant'Agostino. The
              latter would have beenmuch more suitable for processing softer animal meat.
                The Neanderthals, like any group of mobile foragers, would have been faced
              with many competing claims as to how best to organize their limited labour and
              locational tactics to achieve subsistence security. Perhaps, for instance, they
              would sometimes make do with the raw materials to hand because other factors
              - such as the presence of prey and the size of the human group in need of
              feeding - were more pressing. The Italian study has shown us that patterns of
              tool use can be an invaluable source of information about the complexity of




170
                                                                          THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



behaviour at the regional level. 74 We will now take a look at the organization of
groups in the landscape.


Peoples in the landscape

Having discussed the different patterns of movement across the landscape by
various Ancients, and the variety of ways in which they obtained subsistence
and raw materials, we can finally dispense with a model that long dominated the
interpretation of Neanderthals: Francois Bordes' theory of the five distinct,
sedentary Neanderthal tribes. 75 According to this view, the five tribes lasted for
many millennia. They did not evolve culturally so much as mark time, pushing
into and being pushed out of the most desirable rockshelters of the region. He
believed that these populations had very low regional densities, but that they
were also very sedentary, with each group using one cave at a time. For Bordes
this was the hallmark of the Middle Palaeolithic world: 'A                man must often have
lived and died without meeting anyone of another culture, although he knew
                                                                                          76
"that there are men living beyond the river who make hand axes".'
   But sitting in one spot, not talking to the neighbours and just exploiting the
immediate countryside would be a sure route to extinction. To survive as a
hunter or scavenger in temperate latitudes, especially under glacial conditions,
depends to a large extent on mobility. This is the means by which people
constantly adjusted to the available resources. Mobility in search of food also
brings benefits in terms of acquiring information about other resources such as


6y A provocative comparison, by
Lewis Binford, of the size of
territories used by modern foragers
 (above) and Middle Palaeolithic
foragers in the Dordogne. Francois
Hordes' idea that the Neanderthal
tribes who lived in the caves led
                                                                                   AeEA ^EAIOEhJTIA.LI-'r'
separated, isolated lives from their   /ZEAJOE.r'J-riAl^ KfOVEA 0*r                V4EO SY- t-llf^E.
                                       o*j£. G/wt Sa*j ^aw/ly                      f-JvKIAM I UT FAW/i./£4
near neighbours seems very unlikely    OVEK EL.EVE hJ MOKITMS                      DU/S/ hj<& A n^E
when mobility must have been the key                                               Yeab    /=>E&

to survival.

                                                                                               Le Mou-Sti e K


                                                                                                             /°£C« OE L-A-Z,E




                                                      AO&I   VAUF-fSE.                                       -(jBEMALs
                                                                         Dordogne         Area
                                                                                  France
                                         Comparative                             Reqiokjal           6cale6
                                                                         5CALE     in   Mile*
                                                 io      o     10   zo     .so




                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                    7I
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                                 Southern Foragers at Klasies River Mouth


                    The caves at Kiasies River Mouth, perched on the northern edge of
                    the now submerged continental shelf of southern Africa, were
                    occupied for at least 60,000 years during the late Middle Palaeo-
                    lithic. The climate during this time changed from interglacial to

                    early glacial conditions, but the abundant faunal remains exca-
                    vated at the site do not reflect these environmental shifts. Nor are
                    the changes in the lithic material - from the Middle Stone Age to
                    pre-Upper Palaeolithic (the Howieson's Poort) and back - reflected
                    in any significant differences in the animal bones. (This is
                    particularly interesting if, as John Wymer has suggested, the
                    geometric microliths in the Howieson's Poort were being tipped
                    with poison and hafted in arrows. 77 )
                       The rich faunal assemblages yielded over 10,000 bones, which
                    were then identified to particular animal species. In a detailed study
                    of these remains, Richard Klein commented on the different uses
                    which were made of animals belonging to five different size
                    classes. 78 Animals in class IV, weighing between 600 and 900 kg (0.6
                    and 0.9 tons), were numerically dominant. Among these, the eland
                    and Cape buffalo were represented by only a very selective number
                    of anatomical elements, mainly heads and feet. This was in marked
                    contrast to the smaller species - such as steenbok, bushbuck and
                    blue antelope - whose complete carcasses had been carried back
                    to the cave. Klein interpreted these differences as the outcome of
                    field butchery decisions. Large animals were butchered into
                    manageable parcels and heavy limb bones thrown away. Once
                    butchered, the meat was piled inside the skin and dragged home.
                    Such a practice is often referred to as the 'schlepp' or drag effect.
                    Leaving the foot bones in the skin provided a set of handles,
                    although this does not adequately explain why so many teeth and
                    horn cores from skulls are found at the sites. 79 Small animals, on the
                    other hand, were easily transportable to the cave intact.
                       Klein studied the numerous animal teeth found at the site in order
                    to examine the different strategies used for hunting small and large
                    species. The ages of the prey can be reconstructed by analysing the
                    eruption of their teeth, i.e. from the height of the tooth above the jaw
                    line. In this way a profile of the population is built up. The eland
                    remains came mainly from prime-aged adults: good evidence,


                    68 Grazing animals of all sizes
                    have been found at the Klasies
                    River Mouth. Their remains have
                    been interpreted in different ways by
                    Richard Klein and Lewis Binford.




172
                                                                 THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




               REGIONAL                                 ARCHAEOLOGY
             SETTLEMENT




                                                 High              Low
         / Local group area                             m m
         •   Feeding location                     Density of artifacts

             Stone source

             Protected sleeping site



6g   The archaeology offoraging by the Ancients in warmer southern latitudes,
based on reconstructions of subsistence at Klasies River Mouth. Territories were
smaller than in the Neanderthals northern world (fig. 65), while plant
foods provided more of the diet. Here the densest concentrations of artifacts
are to be found outside the foraging areas, at water holes and sleeping sites.


according to Klein, that herds were driven either into traps or over
cliffs where the healthy adults (which would otherwise have been
difficult to catch) were killed. On the other hand, the age profile of
the Cape buffalo, one of the largest animals in the collection, is very
different. These animals are mostly represented by very young and
old individuals, a pattern best explained in terms of scavenging
parts of animals that have died from natural causes or were killed
by carnivores.
   Lewis Binford agrees with Klein that the smaller prey, below 40
kg (88 lb) in weight, were probably hunted opportunistically. But he
has argued that all the large animals, including eland, were
scavenged. 80 His view is that the bones brought back to the caves
were not evidence of the schlepp effect, but instead still had some
meat on them or contained marrow resources. The bones, he
suggests, had been picked up from carcasses already ravaged by
hyenas, Cape hunting dogs, leopards and lions. But Binford's
theory fails to take account ofthe large number of prime adulteland.
We therefore suggest that a mix between the hunting and foraging
scenarios of Klein and Binford is much more likely.




Mir-" -*'
                       5




                                                                                             173
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              firewood, raw materials and people. Among modern hunters, such information
              is   the key to survival in very harsh climates. For example, a modern group of
              Inuit families would annually travel great distances, equivalent say to the area
              covered by the classic Middle Palaeolithic sites of the Perigord (fig. 67).
                   The study of raw materials can again help us to build up a picture of the
              mobility of the Ancients. Recent research by Wil Roebroeks, Jan Kolen and
              Eelco Rensink has reconstructed the patterns of raw material usage in the
              earlier Middle Palaeolithic of Europe. 81 The greatest distance traced over
              which raw materials were transported during this time, some 200,000 years ago,
              is about 100 km (62 miles), but this was an exception. In the later Middle

              Palaeolithic (130,000-40,000 years ago) the situation is different, and
              occasionally distances of up to 300 km (186 miles) have been recorded.
              Distances were generally greater in central and eastern Europe because
              conditions during the last glacial cycle were harsher, increasing the size of
              territories over which groups had to forage and hunt.                 There may even have
              been some rudimentary alliance networks between groups and individuals, as
              described earlier. But these social networks were still very limited in scale and
              complexity, and most of the time raw materials for making stone tools only
              travelled local distances.
                   A detailed study by Jean-Michel Geneste of raw materials during the Middle
              Palaeolithic in Aquitaine, southwest France, also emphasizes the local nature of
              the use of lithic resources. 82 The table below indicates that raw materials in
              Aquitaine were rarely obtained from more than 80 km (50 miles) away. 83


                                                                                   Percentage of
                                                               Percentage of         flint used
                                             Radius from         flint on a           i.e.   made
                                               site (km)             site             into tools

                               Local              >5                55-98                    1-5

                               Region            5-20               2-20                10-20

                               Exotic           30-80                <5                74-100


                         jo   Table to show the relation between the availability of raw material and
                                               the extent to which it was used.



              Local is thus truly local, the majority of flint coming from within a 5-km radius
              of a site. The further away flint was obtained, the more likely it was to be
              introduced to the site as a retouched tool. 84 Some equipment - such as spears
              tipped with points, flakes, or a reduced piece with a retouched edge - was
              obviously being carried around the landscape, presumably in anticipation of
              future use.     So their behaviour was not completely expedient; not, in other
              words, always a case of find the material, knap it, use it, throw it away all in the
              same place. But the question remains, to what extent does it compare with the
              planning of the Moderns in the Upper Palaeolithic?
                   The   Neanderthals, and Ancients generally, appear to have used the
              landscape in different ways from the Moderns. As we shall see in Chapter 9, not
              only is there evidence after 40,000 years ago for structured campsites with




174
                                                                          THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




7/   Raw material routes for stone in the later Middle Palaeolithic (top) and the early Upper
Palaeolithic (above).   The dashed line indicates the distances over which shells and other objects
were obtained. Clearly raw materials travelled much greater distances during the Upper
Palaeolithic.




storage pits and base          camps (which are properly called villages), but the
distance over which raw materials - now including shells and lumps of fossil
resin - were transported was much greater.                  Moreover, the emphasis in the
Upper Palaeolithic on small, standardized, light, stone blade and bladelet
elements adds hafting and composite tools to the assessment of planning from
the archaeological evidence. Such components are only regularly found in the
few pre-Upper Palaeolithic assemblages of the Middle Palaeolithic. These, as
we have seen, are geographically restricted to parts of the Middle East, north




                                                                                                      175
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



              and southern Africa. They were not part of the cultural package, including art,
              ornament and display items generally, that betokens the widespread social
              networks universal after 40,000 years ago (Chapter 9).


              EXPANSION INTO NEW HABITATS
              Hominids first left Africa, in the Out of Africa 1 dispersal, more than a million
              years ago. By half a million years ago they had reached as far north as the British
              Isles; but the next 450,000 years saw little additional expansion, especially

              when we consider that the continents of the Americas and Australia were
                                       Yet some authorities have made the case for the
              accessible for colonization.
              origins during this period of truly cultural behaviour, linked to geographical
              expansion. Why?
                 Gerhard Bosinski points out that it was only during the late Middle
              Palaeolithic (after 130,000 years ago) that the north European plain was settled
              for the first time. In his opinion, this geographical expansion marks a great
              threshold in    human development. 85 Before this period, he argues, artifact
              assemblages varied according to situation, such as the function of a tool or the
              availabilty of raw materials. But the Middle Palaeolithic saw the appearance of
              Formengruppe, distinct lithic industries which suggest that cultural traditions
              had replaced environmental factors               in   the   determination of stone tool
              manufacture.
                 A similar conclusion was reached by Desmond Clark in his discussions of
              East Africa in particular and the Middle Stone Age of Africa in general. 86 He
              cites the   expansion of Middle Stone Age populations into a variety of new
              habitats in Africa, ranging from areas today covered by desert to those of high
              rainfall.   According to Clark, the colonization of new territories indicates an
              advance from the previous Early Stone Age Palaeolithic, and signals the
              beginning of regional cultural identities and biological differentiation. 87
                 The Ancients also expanded into the steppes of Central Asia, at the
              easternmost limits of the Neanderthal world. This                  is   evident from the
              widespread finds of Mousterian artifacts over formerly uninhabited territory,
              and also from the occupation (e.g. at Teshik Tash) of extremely rugged terrain
              at altitudes of up to 1,500   m   (c.   5,000 ft). Further northwest too, on the steppes
              of the Ukraine, it is noticeable that the earliest occupation is associated with
              Middle Palaeolithic artifacts along the major rivers of the Dnepr and Dnestr.
              This is probably an extension of the pattern of new settlement observed by
              Bosinski for the North European Plain. The dating of these sites is placed in the
              last glaciation, about 60,000 years ago.

                 But for all the apparent geographical gains made by the Neanderthals and
              Ancients, we would argue that their world remained limited. We find nothing
              to support the Bosinski/Clark theory that the Middle Palaeolithic was a great
              cultural watershed.     We believe that, compared with the expansion of the
              Moderns after 40,000 years ago, the Ancients were doing nothing more than
              opportunistically filling up some of the less attractive landscapes in their world.




176
                                                          THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS



Among these would be the areas of the eastern Sahara which are hyperarid
today but were wetter 120,000 years ago, and so offered the opportunity for
settlement. These opportunities were often brief. Such expansions by the
Ancients, moreover, were very closely determined by the climate: populations
ebbed and flowed from marginal habitats as the climatic cycles ran their course.
While such fluctuations had probably occurred ever since Homo erectus left
Africa over 1 million years ago, the significance of settlement gains made after
200,000 years ago is that new territories (previously unsettled even under
optimum climates) were now used for the first time. But this did not lead to the
dramatic and rapid expansion of population into new continents. So, far from
being released from the shackles of environment by major developments in
culture, Neanderthal populations - like all the Ancients - were still governed
by changes in climate and resources. As a result the hand axes, scrapers and
points    which they used    strike   us not as cultural items signifying and
symbolizing group membership, but rather as the items which assisted the
hominids in their survival over many hundreds of thousands of years. In this
respect, the stone tools   were versions of the unmodified pebbles that wild
chimps have been observed using to crack open nuts in the forests of West
Africa.   We can see no convincing evidence from the campsites of the Ancients,
from their use of resources or the varieties of stone tool assemblages they
chipped, or from the limited geographical expansion they undertook, that the
change from being a hominid assisted by tools (an Ancient) to a hominid with
behaviour organized symbolically (a Modern) took place during the Middle
Palaeolithic. This great shift in behaviour, we believe, only came later, after

40,000 years ago (Chapter 9).




                                                                                      177
      J2   Map to show the key sites and the maximum extent of the ice sheets (dark tint ) in Upper Palaeolithic Europe.




178
                                      CHAPTER 8

                  The Fate of the Neanderthals



As we have seen, we can trace early modern humans in Africa and the Middle
East from at least 100,000 to 90,000 years ago, but if they then expanded further
north and west from Israel, their trail goes cold. This may be partly due to the
lack of informative sites excavated over much of Asia, but even those that are
known have produced evidence only of Neanderthal fossils as far east as Teshik
Tash. For areas as large as the Indian subcontinent we have virtually no data at
all.   It is not until about 40,000 years ago that evidence appears of people other

than Neanderthals in western Eurasia. At about the same time, and probably in
association with this, we find the first true European Upper Palaeolithic
industry,     which  known as the Aurignacian after the cave in France
                      is

(Aurignac) where it was initially identified. Not only does the Aurignacian have
a preponderance of tools made on long slender blades, but bone, antler and
ivory artifacts, jewellery, ornaments and art in the form of figurines and
engravings are also now found within well-organized campsites.



The earliest Moderns in Europe: the anthropological evidence
The site of Staroselye in the Crimea has yielded part of the skeleton and skull of
an infant aged about two. The child looks modern in both skull and skeleton,
but the associated artifacts are Middle Palaeolithic. It is not clear whether this
skeleton is a later intrusion into the Middle Palaeolithic levels, or whether it is a
Ukrainian equivalent of the association between Moderns and the Middle
Palaeolithic observed at Skhul and Qafzeh. This might then represent an early
Modern in western Eurasia. Other possible early Moderns are represented by a
few jaw and tooth fragments associated with the earliest Upper Palaeolithic
level at the Bulgarian cave of Bacho Kiro, and radiocarbon dated to more than

43,000 years ago. The shadowy nature of the earliest European Moderns is
manifested at the Spanish site of Cueva Morin, where two pseudomorphs (soil
traces of buried bodies) dated at about 34,000 years indicate a very                 non-
Neanderthal stature of over 1.8        m (about 6   ft)   for the vanished bodies.
   We can put more substantial flesh on the early Moderns in Europe from
about 34,000 years ago.    1
                               A frontal bone from Velika Pecina in Croatia has a high
forehead, small brows and a radiocarbon date from an overlying artifact level of
more than 34,000 years, while a similarly fragmentary but more robust frontal
bone from Hahnofersand, Germany, has been directly dated at about 33,000
radiocarbon years. The latter specimen is robust enough to have led some
scholars to suggest that it is from a transitional Neanderthal-Modern




                                                                                            179
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS




                    73  One of the first illustrations
                    (from Lartet and Christy 1875)
                    of the early modern skull known as
                    the 'Old Man' of Cro-Magnon
                    found in a rockshelter in the
                    Dordogne in 1868.



              individual, either an evolutionary intermediate or an actual hybrid.       But it
              seems more likely that it is just from a very strongly built early Modern.
              Unfortunately,     it   was recovered from a river bed without any associated
              materials.
                Similar claims of affinities with the Neanderthals have been made for the
              large sample of human fossils from the cave of Mladec in Czechoslovakia. Here,
              the remains of several males, females and a child show considerable variation in
              size and robusticity.  The adult assumed males have very strong but modern
              brow ridges, whereas the females have little or no brow development. The
              skulls are relatively long and some have bulging occipital bones at the rear,
              which are reminiscent of those of some Neanderthals. Yet the preserved facial
              parts indicate a flat face with forward placed cheek bones, contrasting strongly
              with the Neanderthals (pi. 71). Probably dating from about 33,000-30,000
              years ago, these Mladec people were undoubtedly primitive compared with
              modern Europeans, but primitive does not necessarily mean especially like, or
              derived from, Neanderthals. The strong build of the Mladec skulls,
              particularly the males, is matched today in the most rugged individuals from
              areas as far from Europe as South America and Australia, where there is no
              suggestion of a Neanderthal connection. Of a similar age (about 32,000 years),
              the cranial vault from Stetten (Vogelherd) in Germany is almost a twin of one of
              the female Mladec skulls.
                Various fragmentary early modern humans were found with Aurignacian
              stone tools in western Europe, some of which are convincingly modern. The
              most famous specimens are the remains found in the Cro-Magnon rockshelter
              in the Dordogne in 1868 (pi. 69). These remains, as we have already discussed,

              gave their name to the whole European Upper Palaeolithic race, and probably
              come from the later Aurignacian about 30,000 years ago. The 'old man' of Cro-
              Magnon (Cro-Magnon 1) is often contrasted with the 'old man' of La Chapelle
              (who we saw was probably no more than 40 years old at death) and the contrast
              is startling (pi. 80). Although their dissimilarity is somewhat exaggerated by the

              tooth loss in their jaws (which shortens the Cro-Magnon's face even more) the
              differences are real enough, particularly in the high forehead, small brows, low
              square orbits, wide, short and flat face, small nose and prominent but hollowed
              cheek bones of the Cro-Magnon. These differences extend through the rest of
              the skeleton, which is better represented at Cro-Magnon than at Mladec. The




180
                                                                           THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



Cro-Magnon skeletons, especially of male individuals, were strongly built, but
they were    tall   with long lower parts to the arms and          legs.   These features
contrast with the apparently cold-adapted physique of the Neanderthals
(Chapter 4) and would suggest, if we did not know that these individuals came
from Europe, that they were in fact from tropical or subtropical areas. This
unusual physique (seemingly so inappropriate for the cold conditions then
prevailing in Europe) was apparently inherited by successive generations of
Cro-Magnons until the peak of the last glaciation, which suggests an impressive
ability to cope culturally with the worst effects of the cold. However, from the

glacial   maximum (about 18,000 years ago) onwards, later Cro-Magnons seem
to have developed the sort of physique one would expect for their temperate or
cold habitats, and in this sense they became more like the Neanderthals as well
as   modern Europeans. It has been suggested by Milford Wolpoff that the
differences in limb proportions between the Neanderthals                    and the Cro-
Magnons occurred as the latter took up longer distance walking and running,
following changes in hunting patterns or the development of wider social
networks. But this does not explain why such a long-legged physique should
have appeared as long ago as 1.6 million years in the skeleton of the West
Turkana boy, or in the 100,000-year-old skeletons from Skhul and Qafzeh,
which were found in a Middle Palaeolithic context. We believe instead that
climatic adaptation was responsible for these differences in physique.
   By 26,000 years ago complex burials, often accompanied by red ochre
powder, are known throughout western and eastern Europe, from Paviland
cave in Wales to Dolni Vestonice and Pfedmosti in Czechoslovakia. In one of
the most tragic scientific losses of the Second World War, the entire collection
of over 25 skeletons from Pfedmosti was lost in an arson attack, along with some
of the Mladec remains.



The last Neanderthals
After 30,000 years ago there is no longer any trace of the Neanderthals, but
archaeology provides some further clues as to their fate.              It is   now widely
believed    that    a   regional   industry in southwest France and            Spain,   the
Chatelperronian, was   made by Neanderthals, based on the fossil remains
associated with it at Saint-Cesaire and Arcy-Renne in France. The Saint-
Cesaire find, made in 1979, has been especially important. Now dated to about
36,000 years ago by       TL techniques,   it consists   of the partial skeleton and skull
of an undoubted Neanderthal, in the higher of two Chatelperronian levels at
the rockshelter. 2 The best evidence of the industry comes from the site of Saint-
Cesaire. The Chatelperronian has some Middle Palaeolithic features, but many
of the tools are made on well-struck blades. The characteristic Chatelperronian
point or knife has a curved back with blunting retouch (similar to the blade of a
modern penknife), a shape very reminiscent of the naturally backed knives of
the Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition B          (MAT B). In the latter, the blunted
edge was formed by the cortex or outer layer of the flint. These similarities led




                                                                                                    181
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



              Francois Bordes to trace the lithic ancestry of the Chatelperronian back to the
              MATB.
                 There are similar indications of the last Neanderthals elsewhere in Europe
              taking up new technological ways, for instance the Uluzzian industry in Italy
              and the Szeletian complex in eastern Europe. Both of these are similar in age
              and form to the Chatelperronian, and consist of a mixture of Middle and Upper
              Palaeolithic techniques and types. Unfortunately, only very fragmentary fossil
              remains are associated with either of these industries, but what little evidence
              does exist is consistent with a Neanderthal origin. Several scholars have argued
              that these industries - like the Chatelperronian in France - were derived from a
              local      Mousterian. 3 However, we saw in Chapter 7 that pre-Upper
                      late

              Palaeolithic (PUP) blade-based industries appeared and disappeared much
