


                                                                                         97
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


              might represent the          common ancestral stock for both Neanderthals and
              modern humans. Our views of the Mount Carmel fossils have developed as the
              fossil record has grown, but in the last few years all of these suppositions have

              been replaced by new hypotheses, as we shall see at the end of the chapter.


              Qafzeh and Shanidar
              The Qafzeh cave lies on the east side of a valley which runs south from the
              famous biblical town of Nazareth. 5 The cave looks rather ordinary when
              viewed from the valley, but it has proved to be one of the most important of all
              fossil   hominid sites (pi. 59). The first series of excavations (1933-35) were
              directed by Rene Neuville, the French consul in Jerusalem. Although he found
              seven    fossil    hominids (two in Upper Palaeolithic levels, the others in the
              Middle     Palaeolithic), the intervention of the       Second World War and           its

              aftermath in Palestine prevented the work from being published in detail
              before Neuville's death in 1952. Work was resumed there between 1965 and
              1979 under the direction of Bernard Vandermeersch, and this produced
              remains of at least another 14 individuals from the Middle Palaeolithic. As at
              Skhul, a number of men, women and children seemed to have been deliberately
              buried, and in the case of the child            known as Qafzeh 11, the burial was
              accompanied by the skull and antlers of a large deer, presumably buried as a
              complete head. There was also a probable double burial of a young adult
              (Qafzeh 9) with a six-year-old child buried across its feet.
                It was recognized early on that the Qafzeh hominids resembled those from

              Mount Carmel, in that some of the material showed a modern morphology, and
              yet was found with a Middle Palaeolithic industry. However, the inadequate
              dating of all these sites prevented real understanding of their relationships and,
              although the Qafzeh and Skhul samples were called 'proto-Cro-Magnoids' in
              the   1950s,      it   was not   until the   Qafzeh finds were studied   in   detail   by
              Vandermeersch and his colleagues that their real importance began to emerge,
              as we shall discuss below.
                It is    an Iraqi cave, Shanidar, that has produced the largest sample of
              Neanderthals from the Middle East (Chapter 4). 6 Nine Neanderthals - ranging
              in age from very young infants to relatively 'old' men, and in completeness from

              a few vertebrae to fairly complete skeletons - were excavated by a team led by
              Ralph Solecki between 1953 and i960. These remains have been studied by
              various workers, but the most exhaustive and informative study was that of
              Erik Trinkaus, published in 1983. Some of these Neanderthals, at least, seem to
              have been deliberately buried, and it has even been suggested that the Shanidar
              4 man was buried with flowers, although this has recently been seriously
              questioned (Chapter 7).


              Amud and Kebara
              No doubt inspired by the success of Solecki's team at Shanidar, a Japanese
              team under H. Suzuki began work in 1959 at Amud Cave in Israel, which lay in




98
                                     HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR




                         A Cold Body in a Warm Cave:
                            Neanderthal Proportions


       The Kebara skeleton is so well-preserved that it has provided the
       best data yet available on Neanderthal anatomy. As we saw in
                                                         7


       Chapter 4, the discovery of this skeleton led scholars to reassess
       both the function of the Neanderthal pelvis and (following examin-
       ation of the hyoid bone) preconceptions about Neanderthal vocal
       abilities.
          Using the proportions of the upper limbs and trunk it has also
       been possible to look at the shape of the whole body, relating the
       width of the pelvis to the estimated height of the Kebara individual. 8
       We have seen that in modern populations body shape can be
       related to climatic adaptation. In hot climates it is advantageous to
       maximize the surface area of the skin for heat loss, and this is
       achieved with a long thin body approximating the shape of a tall,
       narrow cylinder i.e. a tall stature with slim hips. (The skeleton of the
       Homo erectus boy from Nariokotome in Kenya has exactly this body
       shape, similar to modern east Africans.) In cold climates, however,
       stature is low relative to hip breadth (e.g. among the Lapps and
       Inuit); this creates a shorter, wider body approximating a sphere, to
       minimize surface area. How does the Kebara skeleton compare to
       these two body forms?
          Well, the Kebara man most resembles cold-adapted populations
       in the height/hip breadth relationship; in fact his body proportions
       are even more pronounced than those of any modern examples. We
       conclude that even in the relatively warm climate of the Middle
       East, the Neanderthals were fundamentally cold-adapted people;
       this is in marked contrast to the early modern humans, both in this
       area (e.g. Skhul and Qafzeh) and in Europe (the Cro-Magnons).




the same valley (Wadi Amud) as Zuttiyeh Cave. They were rewarded two years
later by the discovery of a fairly complete but shattered Neanderthal skeleton,

at the very top of the Middle Palaeolithic level - so high in the stratigraphy that

itwas mixed not only with Upper Palaeolithic artifacts, but even with pottery
from the levels further above. 9 Three more fragmentary specimens were found
in subsequent years. But nobody could take seriously the published absolute

dates from the Amud Neanderthals, since one method suggested a date of only
28,000 years ago and a second method less than 20,000 years. Recent work at
Amud by an Israeli team has produced further Neanderthal fossils and a re-
evaluation of the dating is underway (see below).
  Another Mount Carmel cave, Kebara, has recently been the focus of
renewed international collaboration. It had previously produced a number of
Upper Palaeolithic fossils in 1931, and a Neanderthal child in 1964. But the
most spectacular find, made in 1984, was of a skeleton in an evident grave
(see box above). 10




                                                                                      99
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


                      The skeleton was virtually intact from the lower jaw to the pelvis, but the
                   skulland upper jaw were missing except for one tooth; the skull was
                   presumably present originally, but had been removed by subsequent human or
                   animal activity.



                   Comparing the fossils
                   Understanding the complexities of the Middle East is no easier for the Middle
                   Palaeolithic than it is for the present day.       We will look at the physical variation
                   in the fossils in this section, and then go on to discuss the dating evidence; the
                   archaeological evidence will be surveyed in Chapter 7. Broadly speaking, the
                   fossils, with one or two exceptions, can be divided into Neanderthal-like ones,

                   and those similar to modern humans. The former include the remains from
                   Tabun, Shanidar, Amud and Kebara, whereas the more modern-looking
                   specimens are from Skhul and Qafzeh.


                   Middle East Neanderthals
                   The characteristics used to classify the Neanderthal specimens have already
                   been detailed in Chapter 4. The Tabun, Shanidar and Amud specimens
                   generally have a long, broad and low skull, a large double-arched brow ridge, a
                   big face with a particularly large nose and midfacial prognathism, and a large
                                                                                         11
                   palate and lower jaw with little or no chin development.                   This is certainly so
                   for the Kebara lower jaw, which is one of the most massive human jaws known.
                   Amud has the largest brain capacity of any fossil hominid, over 1,700 ml, while
                   Tabun is one of the smallest Neanderthals in this respect, with a volume of only


long, broad and                                          high and rounded
low braincase                                            braincase
                                                                                                        developed
                                                                                                         forehead
                                  Large, double-arched
                                        brow ridge

                                                                                                       small brow
                                                                                                             ridge


                                                                                                         low orbits

                                          midfacial
                                          prognathism
no canine fossa                                          hollowed cheeks
                                                         (canine fossa)
                                                         no retromolar gap
retromolar gap
                                                                      large teeth
                                       minimal chin
                                                          some chin development
             Shanidar 1                                                       Qafzeh 9

                   jg A comparison of the Shanidar 1 Neanderthal and Qafzeh g early modern skulls. Both were
                   found associated with Middle Palaeolithic artifacts, but the modern Qafzeh hominid is probably
                   more ancient than the Shanidar Neanderthal. Note the comparatively large nose and low
                   forehead of the Neanderthal.




100
                                            HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR




40    A comparison of the Mount Carmel finds; from the original publication by McCown and
Keith: (left) the Tabun Neanderthal and (right) the Skhul 4 early Modern.




about 1,250 ml. Brow ridge thickness is variable, being massive in the small
Tabun female and surprisingly slender in the big male from Amud (pi. 50).
Chin development varies too: it is minimal in Kebara, the Tabun 1 woman, and
the Shanidar jaws, but more marked in Amud and Tabun 2 - even leading to
suggestions that the latter fossil might be a primitive modern rather than a
Neanderthal. In the rest of the skeleton, these Neanderthals have the stocky,
cold-adapted body proportions of their European counterparts, but are on
average a little taller, with Amud being by far the tallest Neanderthal known, at
about 1.78       m (5   ft   10   in).   Their pelvic structure     is   like   that of other
Neanderthals - in fact the distinctive Neanderthal extended pubic ramus shape
was first recognized in the Tabun woman, and the Kebara male has the longest
pubic ramus ever found.


The 'Moderns'
The Skhul and Qafzeh samples do look decidedly 'modern' when compared
with specimens from sites such as Tabun and Kebara. 12 The braincases are
high and rather short, rounded in profile but, unlike Neanderthals, parallel-
sided rather than spherical in posterior view (pis. 56—58). The brow ridges are
moderate or small in skulls like Skhul 4 or Qafzeh 9, but even where the brow
ridge is strongly built (as in Qafzeh 6 or Skhul 5), it is different in shape from
that of Neanderthals. The face has a broad but low nasal opening, and mid-
facial projection is not developed.         The cheek bones are hollowed rather than
flat or inflated,   unlike the Neanderthals, and they do not retreat at the sides.
The orbits are wide, but low, and the whole upper face is broad. The lower face
is   more projecting, particularly in Qafzeh 9, where the teeth are very large, and




                                                                                                101
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


              the total prognathism of the face is strong - a distinctly primitive feature.
              Forehead development is well marked in most of the skulls, but less so in Skhul
              9.   The lower jaws are relatively shorter than those of Neanderthals without the
              forward positioning of the teeth; tooth size is in some respects more primitive
              than that of Neanderthals, however, with large third molars in such fossils as
              Qafzeh 9.
                 The skeletons of the Skhul and Qafzeh samples are even more modern than
              their skulls. And in contrast to the Neanderthals, their body proportions are
              tropical rather than cold-adapted, with long forearms and tibiae and an average
              stature of about 1 .83   m (6 ft) in males and .70 m (5
                                                                 1           ft 7 in) in females.    However,
              as    with Neanderthals, they were probably well-muscled, making them
              somewhat heavier for their height than living humans. This may explain why
              they, like Neanderthals, were larger-brained than us, their brain capacity
              averaging about 1550 ml. But distinct from Neanderthals, they had pelvic
              morphologies of modern type, suggesting that their hip                    joints functioned

              exactly like ours.Compared with the relatively short-legged Neanderthals,
              these early Moderns should have found long-distance walking a lot easier. And
              the fact that (so far at least) the skeletons reveal fewer signs of fractures and
              stress    suggests    that   their   life-style   was   less   wearing than that of the
              Neanderthals.



              New dates for old fossils
              So what was the relationship between these Neanderthal and modern groups in
              the Middle East? As we have seen, an early view was that they represented a
              single,    highly variable population, containing Neanderthal-like and near
              modern forms, which might lie close to the divergence of the Neanderthal and
              modern evolutionary lines. Alternatively, some scholars felt that they were
              perhaps the results of hybridization between contemporaneous Neanderthal
              and modern groups, or the actual evolutionary link between Neanderthal
              ancestors and modern descendants.
                   However,   all           depended on the fact that the sub-groups
                                    these views
              resembling Neanderthals and moderns were contemporaneous, and evidence
              began to emerge that this was not so. First there was evidence from animal
              fossils that the Mount Carmel site of Tabun might be somewhat older than

              neighbouring Skhul. This was supported by an analysis of stone tools from
              both sites, which suggested that the local stone knappers produced progres-
              sively narrower and narrower flakes at Tabun and, if this was so, the Skhul
                                                                                                13
              flakes logically followed on at the very end of the Tabun sequence.                    Thus the
              Tabun people might represent the ancestors for Skhul's inhabitants; so the
              latter    would have continued to develop their stone tool-making skills in a
              regular way as they lived on Mount Carmel. According to this theory, the
              Neanderthals of Tabun would have dated from 50,000-60,000 years ago while
              their more modern descendants lived in Skhul (and Qafzeh?) about 40,000-

              45,000 years ago. But there were some problems with this reconstruction of




102
                                           HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


               1985 VIEW                         1987 VIEW                           1990 VIEW
      40,000     SkhOI                              SkhOI

                Qafzeh

O                Amud                              Amud                                Amud
<               TabQn                              TabQn
j£    60,000    Kebara                             Kebara                             Kebara
<
UJ
>

                                                                                       SkhQI
                                                  Qafzeh                              Qafzeh
     120,000                                                                          TabQn



41 New dating techniques have recently upset the traditional understanding of the early modern
(dark grey) and Neanderthal (white) remains from the Middle East. Until relatively recently,
scientists had believed that Moderns succeeded Neanderthals in the area,   and thus may have
evolved from them (left). But the early results of thermoluminescence, electron-spin resonance and
uranium-series dating placed Moderns both before and after the Neanderthals (centre). The
current interpretation of the evidence, however, suggests that at times the two groups may have
been approximate contemporaries (right).




events too. For one thing, not everyone was convinced that there was such a
neat evolutionary sequence from the Neanderthals to the early Moderns in the
Middle East. Additionally, while some analyses of the large mammals found at
the sites supported the view that Tabun preceded Skhul, studies of the small
mammals suggested that level C at Tabun (which contained the Neanderthal
woman's skeleton) was actually younger than the main hominid levels of early
Moderns at Qafzeh.
   It was impossible to test these views as long as the only applicable dating

method was radiocarbon, which ceases to produce accurate results on materials
over 40,000 years old - the critical time period in the Middle East. But things
started to improve in 1987 when the technique of thermoluminescence (TL:
see box pp. 58-59) was applied to burnt flints from the levels adjoining the
Neanderthal burial at Kebara. The result - a date of about 60,000 years - was
much as expected, and it was confirmed by electron spin resonance (ESR)
dating of animal teeth from equivalent levels. 14 However, a real shock followed
when the TL technique was applied to the early modern burial levels at Qafzeh.
The date produced was about 92,000 years, implying that the Qafzeh early
Moderns were not only about three times as old as the Cro-Magnons of Europe,
but some 30,000 years older than the Neanderthal burial at Kebara! 15 The
evidence from the small mammals thus seemed to be endorsed, and this age
estimate was further confirmed (even exceeded) by the ESR dating of
associated mammal teeth from Qafzeh at 120,000-100,000 years old. 16
   The next logical step was to test the similar-looking hominids from Skhul,
and these too proved to be ancient: dated by ESR on mammal teeth at 100,000-




                                                                                                     103
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR




                                        Evolution at the Crossroads



                    The hominid remains found at Tabun and Skhul in the Middle East
                    were originally thought to be members of a single population,
                    representing the gradual evolutionary transition of Neanderthals to
                    early Moderns. But as more and more evidence accumulated that
                    the modern-looking samples from Skhul and Qafzeh were actually
                    older than the Neanderthals of Amud and Kebara, this view became
                    untenable. So how can we explain the complex pattern of evolution
                    in the region? Three possible answers are presented below.

                       In one view, the Middle East is simply a zone of overlap between
                    two evolving human lineages. One, basically European, is that of
                    the Neanderthals; the other, African, is that of modern humans. At
                    any one time during the period 120,000-40,000 years ago - prior to
                    Neanderthal extinction in the area-either or both lineages could be
                    represented there; but it is not currently possible to establish
                    contemporaneity (for example the Tabun Neanderthal could be
                    older than, contemporaneous with, or younger than the Skhul/
                    Qafzeh specimens). 17 The fact that some of the associated animals
                    at Skhul and Qafzeh could be found in Africa and Arabia might
                    support an influx of fauna, including humans, from the hotter, more
                    arid south.
                      The second also views the Middle East as an area of overlap
                    between two human lineages. According to this theory, however, it
                    was the modern humans who first settled the region (at least
                    100,000 years ago), with the Neanderthals arriving only about
                    70,000 years ago - perhaps in response to the degenerating climate
                                                                                18
                    in Europe associated with the onset of the last glaciation.    The ESR
                    dates for the Tabun Neanderthal are accounted for by arguing that
                    this individual was actually from layer B at the site. Thus the
                    hominid sequence would be: Zuttiyeh (archaic) with a local late
                    Acheulean over 150,000 years ago; the Skhul and Qafzeh early
                    Moderns with a 'Tabun      C   Middle Palaeolithic industry, about
                    100,000 years ago; and lastly the Tabun, Kebara and Amud
                    Neanderthals associated with a 'TabDn B' Middle Palaeolithic
                    industry between 70,000 and 40,000 years ago. It is further argued
                    that the Neanderthals - with their superior adaptation to colder
                    conditions - might have displaced the early Moderns. Both these
                    explanations, therefore, assume that the Middle Eastern corridor
                    was open in both southern and northern directions.
                       The third option - based on the fact that the early Moderns of the
                    Middle East still show primitive or Neanderthal-like characteristics
                    while the Neanderthals of the region are not as 'classic' as
                    European examples - returns to the original concept of a single,
                    variable population. 19 Thus, this population was a regional variant
                    of Homo sapiens, with its own mixture of primitive, modern and
                    Neanderthal features. The Qafzeh and Kebara people are merely
                    extremes of a continuous range of variation, and only a part of that
                    range (the 'modern' elements) were selected for, leading to the
                    appearance of true anatomically modern humans in the area after
                    40,000 years ago.




104
19 The East Turkana (formerly East Rudolf) area of northern Kenya has produced a wealth
of fossil hominids dating from between one and two million years ago, representing (from
left)   Homo habilis, early Homo erectus, and robust australopithecines (Paratithropus).
20 (Above left) Over 60 hominid fossils have been found at the Arago (or Tautavel) cave in France. About
400,000 years old, these fragments - the front of a skull, a left hip bone and two lower jaws - display
features reminiscent of both earlier Homo erectus populations and later Neanderthals.

21,22 Rear views of the skulls from Biache-St-Yaast in France (top right) and Swanscombe in England
(cast, above right).   Perhaps representing early members of the Neanderthal lineage, these skulls have the
same central depression in the occipital bone (suprainiac fossa) as their Neanderthal successors.




23,24 The skull from Steinheim in Germany displays a very prominent brow ridge, but it is small and
gracile in comparison with other Neanderthals. Some scholars have attributed the modern-looking
hollowed cheek region to distortion suffered during fossilization.
                                                                  2$ {Left) This skull from Saccopastore in Italj
                                                                  dated to about 120,000 years ago - exhibits many
                                                                  Neanderthal features in the brainease and face, but
                                                                  has a relatively small brain capacity.

                                                                  26 (Below left) A reconstruction of the most
                                                                  complete Ehringsdorf hominid skull showing a
                                                                  combination of advanced features (high skull and
                                                                  forehead, large brain) and primitive ones (strong
                                                                  brow ridge, angled occipital). Like Swanscombe,
                                                                  the occipital bone foreshadows that of the
                                                                  Neanderthals.

                                                                  27 (Below right) The skull from Petralona, Greece,
                                                                  may be over 300,000 years old. In many ways the
                                                                  face resembles that of the Neanderthals, with its
                                                                  double-arched brow ridges and inflated cheeks, but
                                                                  the back of the skull is more like that of Homo
                                                                 erect us (see x-ray).




The origins of the Neanderthals




     28,29 Side view of the Petralona skull and x-ray, show ing its strong brow ridge and occipital torus.
30,31 (Above and right) Neanderthal skulls from the French sites of La
Chapelle-aux-Saints (left and above) and La Ferrassie (right and below).
Although discovered in the early years of this century, they remain the most
complete European Neanderthal fossils yet known. The skulls reveal many
typical Neanderthal features: strong, double-arched brows, a bulging
occipital bone at the rear, inflated cheek bones, large teeth, midfacial
projection and little chin development.




32 Casts of two partial female Neanderthal skulls from Krapina in Croatia
(left) and Gibraltar.


33 (Right) Partial Neanderthal skull from the French site of La
Quina.

34 (Below) This rear view of the Neanderthal skulls from (left to right) La
Chapelle-aux-Saints, La Quina and La Ferrassie clearly shows their
distinctive spherical profiles and suprainiac fossae (depressions in the centre
of the occipital bone).




                                          B1^ ^^B^
                                          V*                    ^^^^^B^^*'^^
                                                                                        ^^^^^^^^^^^^B
                                                                                        ^^^P^^^>Sv^i
                                          w^F                                                      ^        ^H
                                                                    ^^g                 WF%
                                         I                           w                  1           i        H
                                         WBB&^L^b-                ^&v
                                                                   p^v-^,^.
                                                                                  "
                                                                                      & BgK <--^
                                                                                            -            ^%4 ijd^H

                                                                                        HSifcsll^'-^s^
                                                                                                         ^JJm
The Neanderthals in Europe


35,36 (Above, left and right) The Guattari (Monte
Circeo) Neanderthal skull was found in 1939,
reportedly in a circle of stones. Recent research
suggests that it may have been brought to the
cave by hyenas.

37,38 (Left) Cast of the reconstructed skull from
Saint-Cesaire in France. Representing one of the
last Neanderthals,the remains were found with
Chatelperronian artifacts, and dated at about
36,000 years ago. (Below) Cast of part of the
Saint-Cesaire skeleton as it was excavated from
the rockshelter.
39 {Left) Humeri (upper arm bones) of the
French Neanderthals from La Ferrassie (male
and female), La Chapelle-aux-Saints and La
Quina. The shafts may not be very thick, but
they are strong. The bowing is probably related
to the power of the muscles, and the large ends of
the bones reflect their large joint surfaces.

40 {Above) Casts of the Neanderthal lower jaws
from Amud in Israel (top) and Saint-Cesaire,
France. Both have the characteristic space behind
the third molar, but also show slight development
of a chin, a more modern feature.
                                                  42 Hand bones of the Shanidar 4
                                                  Neanderthal, displaying the typical strong,
                                                  broad finger bones, the particularly wide
                                                  ends probably related to a powerful grip.

                                                  43 (Below) The beautifully preserved right
                                                  foot of the woman from La Ferrassie.
                                                  Neanderthal leg and feet bones were
                                                  robust to withstand hard use.




Neanderthal anatomy




41 (Opposite) Comparing the pelvis of an early-
Modern from Cro-Magnon (left) and that of a
Neanderthal from La Ferrassie. The huge
opening at the front of the pelvis (obturator
foramen) and long pubic ramus of the
Neanderthal are clearlv visible.
Neanderthals in the Middle East

44-47 (Above left) The Shanidar 1 man clearly suffered
substantial injury, and was probably blind in his left eye.
(Above right and right) The Shanidar 5 skull has an
especially large nose and pronounced midfacial
prognathism. (Below) Skulls of Shanidar 1 (cast, left),
Zuttiyeh (cast, centre) and Tabun. Zuttiyeh could be a pre-
Neanderthal and Tabun (about 110,000 years old?) an early
Neanderthal.
                                                       1




48,49 (Righ?) The Israeli
anthropologist Yoel Rak (facing
camera) at work on the site of Amud
in Israel. (Below) A fairly complete
Neanderthal skeleton was found in
1984 at the Mount Carmel cave of
Kebara in Israel. It belonged to a
large male individual, and dates from
about 60,000 years ago. It is
particularly famous for its pelvis -
which has the longest pubic ramus
ever discovered - and its massive
                                               1
                                               ;   1
lower jaw.




                                                           50 (Above) The Amud skeleton is the tallest
                                                           Neanderthal yet known. It is thought to be a relatively
                                                           late specimen, and is dated by electron spin resonance
                                                           to about 50,000 years ago. Its skull has an enormous
                                                           brain capacity (over 1,700 ml) and displays many
                                                           features characteristic of the Neanderthals.

                                                           51 (Below) The site of   Amud is on the left of this pillai
                                                           (Amud) of rock, after which it has been named.




                                        <**
                                  I.*

                                          i
                                              vi




                    >*'*.
                                    52,53 {Left) The reconstructed skull and skeletal remains
                                    of Skhul 5, an early modern adult male. (Below)
                                    Reconstruction of the Skhul 5 burial. The man was
                                    apparently interred with the jaw bone of a wild boar in
                                    his arms.




Early Moderns in the
Middle East




54 The reconstructed burial of an
early Modern, Skhul 4, a strongly
built male.


55 (Below) The small cave of es-
Skhul on Mount Carmel, Israel,
yielded the remains of ten early
modern individuals.
56 Skull casts of the early modern Skhul 5 and Qafzeh 9. The shape of their braincase is distinctly
modern, but this is combined with a rather large and more primitive projecting face.




57 (Above) The Qafzeh    1 1   skull
is   remarkably modern in
appearance. Belonging to a child
of about 12 years old, it is one of
the most ancient in the Qafzeh
sequence.

58 [Above right) The braincase of
Qafzeh 6 looks rather modern,
but the skull has strong brows
and a wide, flat face.

59 The Qafzeh cave, near
Nazareth, has produced the
largest sample of early modern
humans from anywhere in the
world. They are dated by thermo-
luminescence and electron
spin resonance to between
80,000 and 120,000 years ago.
                                                              The transition to modern
                                                              humans in Africa



                                                              60 {Left) Fossil skull excavated from the site of
                                                              Broken Hill in Kabwe (Zambia). Known also as
                                                              Rhodesian Man, the Broken Hill remains show
                                                              features of both Homo erectus and Homo sapiens and
                                                              are often consequently classified as 'archaic Homo
                                                              sapiens'.




61 (Right) The Bodo skull from Ethiopia may be
about 400,000 years old, and combines a massive
face and a thick skull with a large face. It could be
an early member of the Afro-European populations
represented by the Broken Hill and Petralona fossils.


62 The Sale skull from Morocco is also about
400,000 years old. It is much smaller than specimens
such as Bodo, and probably represents a female. The
back of the braincase looks quite modern, but
displays abnormal neck muscle attachments,
probably caused by disease.


63 (Below) Casts of the two crania from Omo Kibish,
Ethiopia. Both may date from the beginning of the
late Pleistocene.   Omo 2 (left) shows a number of
archaic features in the braincase - including a broad
angular occipital bone - but has a relatively small
brow ridge, whereas Omo      1   is   modern in its cranial
vault but has a broad and quite flat frontal bone.
64,65 {Above left) The Ngaloba 18 skull from Laetoli in Tanzania may date from about 130,000
years ago, and belonged to a borderline Modern. (Above right) Border Cave 1 is a fragmentary skull
and some possibly associated limb bones. Most experts accept it as an anatomically modern
specimen, although many dispute the claims for an antiquity of about 80,000-100,000 years.




                                                                    66,67 {Left and below right) The Jebel Irhoud
                                                                    1 cranium from Morocco is a late archaic


                                                                    specimen, probably dating from between
                                                                    200,000 and 100,000 years ago. It combines a
                                                                    rather primitive cranial vault with a large but
                                                                    more modern-looking face.




                                                                       68 {Left) The Jebel Irhoud 2 skull.
                                                                       Consisting originally of only two parts,
                                                                       the differences between the modern
                                                                       front and primitive rear are so
                                                                       pronounced that the two pieces were
                                                                       once thought to have come from two
                                                                       different individuals, one an Ancient
                                                                       and the other a Modern.
The Moderns arrive in Europe

                               69-71 {Top) The 'Old Man' of Cro-
                               Magnon is associated with late
                               Aurignacian artifacts, and dates from
                               about 30,000 years ago. Note the high
                               forehead, small brows and hollowed cheek
                               bones of this early Modern. (Centre)
                               Probable male and female skulls from
                               Pfedmosti in Czechoslovakia, dating from
                               about 26,000 years ago. (Bottom) The cave
                               site of Mladec in Czechoslovakia yielded

                               the remains of several early Moderns
                               associated with the Aurignacian, including
                               this skull which probably belonged to a
                               female. Although the bulging occipital
                               resembles some Neanderthal specimens,
                               the facial features are distinctly modern.



                               FACING PAGE

                               72-74 ( Top) Three probably female early
                               modern skulls from Europe: Cro-Magnon
                               2 (left), Abri Pataud (centre) and
                               Pfedmosti 4 (cast, right). (Middle) These
                               three skulls were found in the Cro-
                               Magnon rockshelter in France in 1868.
                               They probably came from two males (1,
                               left and 3, right) and a female (2, centre).

                               (Bottom) This view contrasts the facial
                               form of two French Neanderthals (La
                               Chapelle-au\-Saints on the left and La
                               Ferrassie, right) with that of the Cro-
                               Magnon   1   skull (centre).   Notice the
                               differences in forehead shape and brow
                               ridge size, and the size and shape of the
                               orbits, cheeks and nasal openings.
The transition to Moderns in the Far East
                         and Australasia
                                                                       \jt__



                                            75 {Tup left) Probable male (left) and female
                                            skulls from the Upper Cave at Zhoukouciian,
                                            China. Dated from associated fauna to about
                                            25,000 years ago, these fossils are reminiscent
                                            of the European Cro-Magnons and are
                                            perhaps the oldest known early modern skulls
                                            from the region.
                                            76 (Above) The Dali skull from China dates
                                            from the late middle Pleistocene. It combines
                                            large brow ridges and a thick, low braincase
                                            with a large but rather modern-looking face.

                                            77 Cast of skulls from Kow Swamp in
                                            Australia (left) and Sangiran in Java (right).
                                            Followers of the multiregional camp believe
                                            the Homo erectus populations from Sangiran
                                            could have been ancestral to the inhabitants of
                                            Kow Swamp, living some 700,000 years later.
                                            78 Two early modern skulls from Liujiang in
                                            China (left) and Keilor, Australia (right).
                                            Compare the gracile skull from Keilor with
                                            the much sturdier Kow Swamp specimen
                                            (plate 77).
                                            HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


80,000 years,
              20
                 and older          still   by the   TL dating of burnt flints.       21
                                                                                           The
Neanderthal sites of Tabun and Amud have recently been dated by ESR:
Amud to 50,000-40,000 years, and Tabun ranging from 200,000 to 90,000
             22
years old.        The Tabun dates are some of the most challenging to conventional
views, in that they date the whole stratigraphic sequence to about double the
traditional age estimates (fig. 41). This means that the Tabun woman found in
level   C is probably about     1   10,000 years old i.e. she was an early Neanderthal
apparently living at around the same time as, or slightly before, the early
modern Qafzeh people.
  If the ESR chronology is correct, some major rethinking of our understand-
ing of the later Pleistocene of the Middle East               is   called for.   The whole
archaeological sequence at Tabun was thought to span hand axe industries
made about 100,000 years ago, through Middle Palaeolithic industries made by
Neanderthals during the middle of the last Ice Age about 60,000 years ago, to
those made by the first early Moderns 40,000 years ago. Now it seems that the
hand axe makers lived in Tabun in an earlier interglacial period about 200,000
years ago, followed by early Neanderthals (including the Tabun woman) living
during or immediately after the last interglacial c. 110,000 years ago. Maybe
early Moderns visited the site from neighbouring Skhul about 90,000 years ago
and Neanderthals from Kebara may have camped there during the colder
period 60,000 years ago.        We do not know when the Neanderthals finally
stopped using Tabun for good, but judging from the evidence at Amud, it was
perhaps 45,000 years ago - when the transition to the Upper Palaeolithic was
beginning in the region. Evidence from the Lebanese site of Ksar Akil (such as
the burial of a modern-looking child, nicknamed 'Egbert') suggests that, by
                                                                                 23
37,000 years ago, early Moderns were back in the Levant to stay.



East and west: Moderns on the move

Comparing the Middle Eastern record with that of western Europe is both
instructive and thought-provoking, because these two areas give us the best
skeletal samples and archaeological evidence for the period between 120,000

and 50,000 years ago. For the relatively good skeletal evidence we can
presumably thank the introduction of the common practice of burial;
preservation of the archaeological evidence is largely due to the presence of
many caves, whose sediments not only contained and protected the bodies, but
also preserved the materials left behind from countless visits and occupations
by these hominids.
  But interpreting the evidence gives us quite different impressions of what is
happening in the two regions. Despite the dramatic climatic changes affecting
western Europe, there is a certain similarity between all the populations of
humans in this area, and a relative likeness too between the preserved remnants
of their behaviour over the 70,000-year period. This was probably because
western Europe was a cul-de-sac at the end of the inhabited world, with only
fairly narrow access routes from the east, none from the west or the glaciated




                                                                                                 121
HUMANS AT THE CROSSROADS: THE MIDDLE EAST CORRIDOR


              north, and none from the south before humans could navigate the Mediterra-
              nean. In contrast, the Middle East has been a long-lasting corridor and
              crossroads between three continents, where distinct populations of animals and
              humans have constantly alternated or coexisted in occupation. It is perhaps no
              coincidence that modern humans first appeared here accompanied by some
              species of mammals characteristic of North African and Arabian areas.
                Conditions in the Middle Eastern corridor 100,000 years ago may have
              provided the springboard for a colonization of the globe by modern humans,
              which had started with the exodus of modern-looking humans from Africa.
              This springboard involved changes in both behaviour - which would have the
              incidental result of territorial expansion   - and anatomy.     Ultimately, this
              successful combination would lead modern humans all the way to Australia
              (between 60,000 and 50,000 years ago), the western Pacific (at least 32,000 years
              ago) and the Americas (some time between 30,000 and 13,000 years ago -
              Chapter 6). A phase of dispersals beginning over 40,000 years ago finally led the
              Moderns to push into the Neanderthals' cul-de-sac of western Europe. We will
              look at the encounter between the European Neanderthals and the Moderns in
              Chapters 8 and 9, but first we will take the road south from the crossroads and
              enter the dark continent of Africa.




122
                                  CHAPTER 6

              The Dark Continent and Beyond:
                The Origin of Homo Sapiens



Where did we evolve? The last century has seen many suggestions, including
submerged continents in the Indian Ocean, the Pampas of Argentina, the
outback of Australia, the Arctic circle in Siberia and the continent of Europe
where earlier types of hominid were supposedly refined. The list of possibilities
is almost as extensive as the range    and variety of evidence used by each region's
archaeologists to support their particular claim to the cradle of modern
humanity. We will now look at the continent of Africa, which we believe has the
strongest claim to be the original          home of modern people - people who
eventually displaced the Neanderthals in Europe and Asia.



A continent comes of age
Although Africa long caught Western imaginations as the primeval continent,
its   central role in the story of human evolution was eclipsed until relatively
recently by the rival claims of Europe and the Far East. The case for the Far
East was established in the last century by Dubois' discovery in Java of
Pithecanthropus (Homo erectus), while Europe had the Neanderthals, followed
by the Mauer (Heidelberg) finds and the fraudulent remains from Piltdown.
The Broken Hill (Rhodesian man) specimen found in 1921 was the first
significant   ancient   African   to   be    identified,   but even the       subsequent
australopithecine find from Taung which followed three years later did little to
focus European and American attention on Africa.           1
                                                               The general feeling at this
time was that Darwin could conceivably have been right about Africa being the
original hominid homeland since it was also the homeland of our close relatives,
the African apes. But it was thought that once early hominids had spread from
Africa, this continent    would always have lagged behind Europe and Asia,
isolated   and backward. Even the archaeological evidence which began to
emerge in the 1930s from sites such as Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania failed to
change such preconceptions because - before the advent of radiometric dating
techniques - it was not known that some of the hand axes discovered by the
Leakeys at Olduvai were in fact over twice the age of those found in the terraces
of the Thames and Somme rivers. At a much later date, the Middle Stone Age
of southern Africa was correlated with the Upper Palaeolithic of Europe, to
which it seemed a rather poor relation, whereas we will see in Chapter 7 that it is
more appropriately correlated with the Middle Palaeolithic (Mousterian) to the
north, and is certainly no poor relation.




                                                                                             123
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND! THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



                 It is only since the 1960s that Africa has begun to claim its rightful place in

              human evolutionary history. First came the absolute dates for the Olduvai
              hominid finds of 'Zinjanthropus boise? (now known as Paranthropus boisei, see
              Chapter 3) and Homo habilis, and then followed the remarkable series of
              discoveries at fossil and archaeological sites such as East Turkana and Hadar. 2
              But the feeling still persisted that all the key events in the story of modern
              human origins took place elsewhere.


              Middle Pleistocene Africans
              Until as recently as 1977, some scholars maintained that the Broken Hill find
              from Zambia dated to only 50,000 years ago (pi. 60). 3 It is now believed to be
              about 200,000 years old or more, and thus belongs to the middle Pleistocene.
              The middle Pleistocene record of Africa also includes related hominids from
              sites such as Bodo in Ethiopia and Elandsfontein (Saldanha) in South Africa,

              which are perhaps double the age of Broken Hill. 4 These hominids, like their
              approximate contemporaries in Europe, are often assigned to 'archaic Homo
              sapiens* or the subspeciesHomo sapiens rhodesiensis* (rhodesiensis was the
                                            k




              species name which Arthur Smith Woodward originally gave to the Broken
              Hill skull in 1921). 5 Like their European counterparts from Arago in France
              and Petralona in Greece (Chapter 3), these ancient Africans are neither sapiens
              in the modern sense,     nor are they true erectus. They have sometimes been
              regarded as African Neanderthals, and while this is a little more plausible, they
              are not Neanderthal in the European sense either.
                 What the African fossils share is a brain size larger than typical erectus,
              housed in a flat, long but more elevated braincase, expanded higher up in the
              parietal region. In rear view they resemble the outline of a conventional house
              as opposed to the rather sagging tent shape of erectus, the slightly squashed
              sphere of Neanderthals, and the distinctive modern form of a house wider
              across the roof than the ground floor. 6 The very strong bar of bone across the
              occipital in erectus is somewhat reduced but still present, and some individuals
              e.g. Bodo retained very thick skull walls (pi. 61). The face, known from the
              Bodo and Broken Hill fossils, is huge and especially wide across the orbits,
              which tend to be low and more rectangular than those of Neanderthals and
              many Moderns. The nose is wide as in Neanderthals but, more like erectus, it is
              flatter and lower, taking up less of the total facial height. The face projects

              overall, especially in Bodo, but in Broken Hill (as in Petralona) it is tucked in
              under the braincase to resemble the Neanderthals or Moderns. The brow ridge
              is bigger than in Neanderthals but,  much as Petralona and the Neanderthals, it
              is hollowed over   much of its width by an extensive frontal sinus (air chamber).
              This seems to indicate that these Ancients needed large brow ridges more for
              their outside   dimensions than for their inner strength and bone mass (see
              Chapter 4).
                 We have little information about the rest of the skeleton, although some of
              the other human bones from Broken Hill may belong with the 1921 skull or a




124
                                     75,000
                                                                               MODERN
                                    years ago
                                                                          HOMO SAPIENS
                                                                                   • Klasies
                                                      \      Border
                                                              Cave


                                     100,000
                                    years ago                 \
                                                                  \
                                                                      N# Klasies



                                     200.000
                                    years ago
                                                   Broken Hill (Kabwe)   #
                                                     \

                                                      \                        ARCHAIC
                                                         \               HOMO SAPIENS • Ndutu /
                                                             V Elandsfontfljn ^<0M^&        /




                                                             Howieson'sPoort

                                         Klasies River Mouth




42   Map of Africa showing some important middle and late Pleistocene hominid sites; the
        diagram above it shows the possible evolutionary position of these hominids.




                                                                                                  125
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              member of the same general population. 7 Most notably a thick midshaft of a
              femur and a complete shin bone (tibia) were found near the skull. They show a
              very interesting combination of features because, even though they are both
              thick-walled, the femur fragment               is   shaped more     like   a   modern than a
              Neanderthal one. This means it is widest front to back, rather than nearly
              circular in cross-section as    it   is   in   Neanderthals. The tibia indicates that it
              belonged to a very tall individual, probably over 1.8 m (6 ft) tall, with body
              proportions more similar to the 1.6 million-year-old West Turkana boy (known
              variously as      Homo erectus or Homo ergaster) and modern Africans, than to
              Neanderthals or more recent populations in temperate or cold areas.
                The Broken Hill remains therefore have a special significance. For example,
              despite the robusticity of the bones and their large joint surfaces, when scaled
              against height they indicate a more linear and narrower physique than that of
              Neanderthals. 8 Unfortunately, neither of the two pelvic fragments from
              Broken Hill can be clearly associated with the main skull. One is from a male,
              the other a female. They are also too incomplete to indicate how much they
              differed from those of Neanderthals, although one does show a clear primitive
              feature in the vertical bar of bone running up from the hip socket. This is also
              found in far more ancient African fossil hip bones and in the early European
              pelvis from Arago in southern France (Chapter 3). 9 In summary we can say that
              these middle Pleistocene Africans were strongly built by modern standards, in
              some ways more primitive anatomically than us or the Neanderthals, yet there
              are hints in the limb bones that in certain respects they are a little closer to us
              than the Neanderthals were. Only more complete skeletons will sharpen our
              conclusions, but since these African Ancients did not seem to practice cave
              burial, we will have to depend on the sort of preservation and lucky discovery
              which yielded the much older, marvellously well-preserved West Turkana
              skeleton already mentioned.
                There are other African fossils that date from the period 500,000-200,000
              years ago, but they are more difficult to relate to the fossils we have already
                           10
              discussed.        These include two partial jaws from Baringo in Kenya, which
              resemble such European fossils as Mauer and Arago 13, particularly in their
              thick bone and lack of chin. Rather more puzzling is the partial skull from
              Ndutu in Tanzania, which is perhaps 400,000 years old. While this might have
              been from a contemporary of the Bodo male, the skull seems quite different in
              shape and more modern. 11 The brow ridge was certainly prominent, and the
              skull quite thick.     Yet the braincase            is   rather shorter and apparently less
              flattened. The face is very incomplete, but it is smaller and the cheek region is
              more delicate than in Broken Hill or Bodo. One explanation is that this is
              merely due to variation       in the      population through time and space, or to
              differences in gender. According to the latter view, Ndutu would be a female.
              This theory is supported by a second fragment of upper jaw from the Broken
              Hill cave which isuncertainly dated, but is less robust than that of the skull, and
              has a more modern-looking cheek region. Further north, in Morocco, there is
              evidence of a similar middle Pleistocene population from the sites of Sale and




126
                               THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



the Thomas Quarries, although here they seem to have comparatively small
                                                                               12
brains and large teeth for an otherwise anatomically advanced form.


Family relationships
If the Broken Hill remains are indeed distinct from true Homo erectus, modern
sapiens,    and the Neanderthals, can they be grouped with any other fossil
specimens? This is a very difficult question, but there is no doubt that there are
strong resemblances to their European counterparts represented by the Mauer,
                                 13
Petralona and Arago finds.
  Perhaps all these remains can be assigned to Homo heidelbergensis (named
after the site of the Mauer discovery, as we saw in Chapter 3).          This species
would have been a descendant of the original African early Homo erectus or
Homo ergaster, and a probable ancestor for both the Neanderthals in the north
and modern sapiens in Africa. The evolutionary split must have been under way
by 200,000 years ago to judge by the Neanderthal-like Ehringsdorf remains and
perhaps even earlier according to some Swanscombe dates. If this widespread
Ancient, Homo heidelbergensis, evolved into Homo sapiens in Africa, where is the
evidence of that transition ?



The transition to modern humans
Southern Africa
We can trace this evolutionary process in various parts of Africa and perhaps
even in the Middle East, at Zuttiyeh. 14           From South Africa there is the
Florisbad 'skull' (really only fragments) which has a broad             flat   forehead,
moderate brow ridge, and a short, flat and broad face. The braincase is thick,
but overall       it   seems to have   a reasonable 'transitional'   shape. Its age   is

uncertain, but appears to lie between 200,000 and 100,000 years; archaeological
associations are with a late hand axe industry or the early Middle Stone Age.         A
damaged lower jaw from the Cave of Heaths, Makapansgat, South Africa is
similar in age, quite small, and has a hint of a chin at the front. From Tanzania,
close to Olduvai Gorge, the Ngaloba site at Laetoli produced a rather odd skull
in 1978 (pi. 64). This has retained part of the lower face, and is sufficiently

complete to indicate a brain size of about 1,350 ml (fully modern in size), a
rounded rear, and a rather small but continuous brow ridge. Yet the forehead is
very flattened and narrow, and the braincase relatively long and low. The ear
region     is   even reminiscent of that of Neanderthals.      The lower face, like
Florisbad and the Broken Hill fragment, is broad and flat, with hollowed cheek
bones. This Ngaloba skull is dated at about 130,000 years old and is associated
with very early Middle Stone Age artifacts. Some researchers actually regard
Ngaloba as an early Modern, but we prefer to call it a borderline Modern.

North Africa
Also close to the borderline are the specimens from a Moroccan cave at Jebel
Irhoud. Here five different specimens have been found: a nearly complete skull




                                                                                           127
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              (Irhoud i); a braincase (Irhoud 2); a child's mandible (Irhoud 3); a humerus -
              upper arm - fragment (Irhoud 4); and a fragment of hip bone (Irhoud 5). The
              humerus fragment is small but very robust, and the jaw combines big teeth with
              a rather delicate framework and a slight chin. The two skulls show strange

              blends of characteristics (pis. 66-68). The most complete skull (Irhoud 1) has a
              rather primitive braincase with a big broad face, but nevertheless looks quite
              modern in shape. The second skull (Irhoud 2) is so 'transitional' that it was
              originally believed to be from two different individuals, one with a modern
              front, the other with a primitive rear. Eventually enough of the parts in between
              were found to show that there was only one braincase, apparently a genuine
              example of evolution caught in the act of turning an Ancient into a Modern.
                    Until recently these Irhoud pieces had no reliable age estimate. All that
              could be said was that they seemed to belong with stone tools which would not
              have been out of place among the Neanderthals or the early Moderns of Israel.
              Traditionally such tools were dated to the early part of the last glacial cycle, but
              we saw in Chapter 5 that these estimates are often very inaccurate; this may also
              have been the case at Jebel Irhoud. The ESR results from animal teeth
              unearthed in levels near the human fossils suggest a date of between 100,000
              and 200,000 years. 15 Such age estimates place the fossils firmly back into the
              earlier Middle Palaeolithic/Middle Stone Age.

                    ESR techniques have also been applied to animal teeth found near the Singa
              braincase from the Sudan, giving a similar age range to Jebel Irhoud. This
              strange fossil was discovered encased in limestone in the banks of the Blue Nile.
              Because of its bizarre shape it had been regarded as that of an early 'Bushman'
              or Khoisan, and was believed to prove that this southern African 'race' was
              once widespread across Africa. Now it seems that the Singa skull was a peculiar
              member of a population like the one at Jebel Irhoud. The owner of the skull
              seems to have been a long-term sufferer of a disease which affected bone growth
              (perhaps a blood disorder), and this made the parietal region grow thicker and
              broader than normal. The skull base and ear region also bear peculiarities.


              East Africa
              East Africa has produced three further examples of these early borderline
              people.
                        16
                             From Omo Kibish in southern Ethiopia comes a braincase (Omo 2,
              pi.   63) supposedly about 130,000 years old which, like the Irhoud specimen,
              has a more Modern front and an Ancient back. But here the back is not so much
              'primitive' in the sense of being like a Neanderthal or Ndutu, but rather bears a
              more direct resemblance to the much older Ancient, Homo erectus. The brain
              size, however, was at least 1,400 ml and the shape from the rear is like a

              heightened version of Broken Hill. Although the front is damaged there is
              hardly a brow ridge at all. Further south, just over the Kenyan border on the
              eastern side of Lake Turkana, a fragmentary upper jaw, and the front and back
              of a skull have been found at Guomde. This skull, called by its find number
              KNM-ER 3884, has a shape in rear view like the Omo braincase, but the profile
              of the skull is distinctly more modern and curved, although the brow ridge is




128
                                     THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



strong. Separately, a modern-looking femur             (KNM-ER 999) was also found.
Not far away, another skull was found by some tourists on the western shore of
Lake Turkana at Eliye Springs. The face was somewhat eroded, but clearly
resembles those from Irhoud, Ngaloba and Florisbad. In this fossil (KNM-ES
1   1693), the braincase        is   large but very broad,   and could hardly be called
modern. Like the Guomde skull, its age is uncertain.


The first appearance of early modern humans
The transitional group or borderline Moderns we have just discussed display
modern characteristics in a disparate way: they are not all combined in any
single specimen. It        is   not until around 100,000 years ago that the shorter,
rounder skull, smaller brow ridge and face, prominent chin, and lighter skeletal
build - the hallmarks of modern human populations - appear consistently
              17
together.          Let us examine some examples.


East Africa
We saw in Chapter 5 that modern characteristics were combined in certain
skeletons from the Middle East (e.g. Skhul and Qafzeh), but perhaps the oldest
of all such specimens is a partial skeleton from Omo Kibish in Ethiopia (pi.
63).
       I8
            We have already mentioned a braincase (Omo 2) found in the same
region, but the skeleton was discovered in 1967 at a similar level, about 2 km
away. It was one of Richard Leakey's first important fossil finds, although it has
since been overshadowed by his later spectacular successes in the Turkana area
of Kenya. Nevertheless, with an age of well over 40,000 years, and perhaps as
much as 130,000 years, this fossil is in some ways as significant as any of his
other discoveries. The skull is quite complete at the back, and is large and
rather thick-boned. However, it is very modern in shape - both in side and rear
views. The front of the skull is less complete, but there is enough bone to show a
broad and rather flat forehead, and a brow ridge which is thick at the centre but
thin at the sides. The face is missing save for a piece of modern-looking cheek
bone, and there are fragments of the lower jaw which show a clear chin. There
are also fragments of various limb bones which indicate a tall, well-built male
individual who was not significantly different in body form from East Africans
of today. 19 Exactly how the Omo skeleton relates to the more primitive Omo 2
braincase found such a short distance away is likely to remain unclear until
further work can be carried out at the site or it becomes possible to date the
fossils more directly. However, the  Guomde skull mentioned earlier could be
from a related population of early modern people; it combines features of both
specimens, and the femur from Guomde looks quite modern.


Southern Africa
At the southern tip of Africa, human occupation of the complex of caves at
Klasies River Mouth stretches back to the last interglacial, 120,000-130,000
years ago. 20 The early inhabitants lived on top of marine and wind-blown sand




                                                                                           129
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              deposits, where they made Middle Stone Age artifacts, lit fires, and processed
              meat, plants and shellfish (Chapter 7). Fragmentary human bones only give us
              glimpses of what these people looked like. A forehead piece from the site has a
              brow ridge of completely modern type and there are thin-boned skull and jaw
              pieces and elements of modern-looking arm and foot bones. The jaw bones vary
              greatly in size, probably reflecting gender differences, and there is also variation
              in the extent of chin development. Overall, however, these pieces - ranging in
              age from 70,000 to about 120,000 years old - are very close to an anatomically
              modern pattern. The fragmentary nature of the bones and the burning and cut
              marks on some of them have led to suggestions of cannibalism at Klasies; such
              theories, however, are very difficult to confirm.
                 Four additional human fossils believed to date from the South African
              Middle Stone Age are those from Border Cave. 21 Unfortunately, an incomplete
              skull and parts of limb bones (Border Cave 1, pi. 65) and a lower jaw (Border
              Cave 2) were found by archaeologists in a dump created by a farmer who
              mistakenly thought that the cave sediments would make good fertilizer!
              Although the dumps were also full of Middle Stone Age artifacts, it cannot now
              be shown whether the human fossils originally came from the same level as the
              artifacts   because the bones contain insufficient collagen to give an accurate
              radiocarbon date. The skull and limb bones are from a well-built individual by
              comparison with most present-day South African blacks or Khoisan. The jaw
              is   much more delicate and very like those of modern populations, which is also
              true of two further finds excavated under better conditions from Middle Stone
              Age levels: a partial infant's skeleton (Border Cave 3) and another partial lower
              jaw (Border Cave 5). (Incidentally, Border Cave 4 was an Iron Age skeleton
              from the uppermost levels of the cave deposits.) Assuming that the remains
              were attributed to the correct levels, the radiocarbon and ESR dates for the
              Middle Stone Age levels suggest that the fossils are probably all more than
              50,000 years old, and Border Cave 1, 2 and 3 could be more than 80,000 years
                   22
              old.    The possibility still persists, however, that the Border Cave bones may
              have been intrusive burials in the Middle Stone Age levels. 23 Only much more
              sophisticated direct dating of the bones or the discovery of more human
              remains from indisputable Middle Stone Age contexts can solve the problems
              of Border Cave. But regardless of the lingering question mark over the true age
              of the Border Cave human remains, the site itself has been a very significant
              source of information about the Middle Stone Age from the tens of thousands
              of artifacts already found there.


              North Africa
              The date of the first appearance of modern humans in North Africa has been
              very difficult to establish, partly due to the scarcity of fossils more recent than
              the Jebel Irhoud remains, and partly because of doubts about the age of the
                                                                                          24
              distinctive Aterian industry found over much of the area (Chapter 7).            The
              tanged projectile points so characteristic of the Aterian are believed by some
              workers to date from well over 70,000 years ago and are therefore equivalent to




130
                            THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



the earlier European Middle Palaeolithic. This is based on a series of absolute
dates from sites such as Bir Tarfawi in the Egyptian Sahara. Other scholars,
however, especially French ones, subscribe instead to radiocarbon and TL
dates for the Aterian      which suggest that    it is 40,000 years old or less,

equivalent to the earliest Upper Palaeolithic.    Perhaps the final answer to the
age of the Aterian will be similar to the revised estimates of the duration of the
African Middle Stone       Age and the European Middle Palaeolithic. If that
is   so, we   may be looking at a stone-working complex spanning 100,000 years
and associated with a variety of fossil hominids: Ancients, borderlines and
Moderns.
     All this may seem rather peripheral to the question of when modern people
appeared in North Africa, but it is not, because the Aterian site of Dar-es-
Soltan in Morocco has produced the remains of several robustly built but
modern-looking individuals. 25 Most of the fossils are still unpublished, but the
Dar-es-Soltan 5 skull and lower jaw have been the subject of a preliminary
description, and are in various ways said to resemble the more primitive Irhoud
fossils,   the later Moderns in North Africa and Europe, and even recent sub-
Saharan populations. If these Dar-es-Soltan fossils really date from more than
70,000 years ago, they would be of great importance in the story of modern
human origins. But whatever their age, they hint at long-term regional
continuity in North Africa, seeming to link the borderline Moderns of Irhoud
with the late Pleistocene Afalou and Taforalt populations. The latter groups,
along with a 33,000-year-old skull from Nazlet Khater in Egypt, are the North
African equivalents of the European Cro-Magnons: robustly built and showing
mixtures of 'racial' features which are nowadays found scattered across the
populations of the world. Their teeth and limb proportions, however, seem to
mark them clearly as Africans.


Beyond the bones
The fossil evidence we have discussed so far in this chapter builds a case for a
morphological transition right across Africa between Ancients and early
Moderns via the borderline Moderns some time before 100,000 years ago, and
certainly well before the Upper Palaeolithic (or Late Stone Age) which began
c .40,000 years ago. We have seen throughout the last few chapters that we can

no longer expect (as others before us did) that anatomy and behaviour - as
indicated in the archaeological record - go hand in hand. The earliest
anatomically modern specimens of Africa and the Levant may have looked like
us in many ways, but they were not us. They lack the 100,000 years of change
which have made us what we are today. This leaves us with one of the big
questions concerning our origins, why then did these populations look so much
like us?

     Evidently they must have found ways to reduce the heavy demands made on
the skeletons of the Ancients in their everyday activities (stresses       which
probably resulted, in populations such as the Neanderthals, in the evolutionary




                                                                                     131
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              pressure to develop and maintain robusticity). 26 Maybe the pattern of modern
              behavioural complexity, supported by better memory, language and planning
              depth, had already moved from the drawing board to the prototype stage. If
              this is granted, it becomes possible to imagine how cultural behaviour fostered

              solutions to survival which were previously solved by muscular means and high
              activity. Thus physical endurance and strength would have been replaced by

              mental anticipation and problem-solving through social and technical means.
                 Whether or not this was the mechanism for the evolution of modern human
              anatomy we simply do not know. The driving forces behind the evolutionary
              transition to modern-looking people could also have involved climatic change,
              geographical isolation, behavioural or social innovations, or some combination
              of these and other influences. Teasing out the critical factors is going to require
              both new discoveries and new thinking. We present our thoughts on this crucial
              question in Chapter 9.



              The genetic revolution in modern human origins
              In fact, new discoveries and new thinking have already had a great impact on
              the field of human genetics. When the Out of Africa 2 theory began to take
              shape from the emerging fossil and dating evidence around 1980, there was
              little support from studies of living peoples (whether from their bones, teeth or

              their hereditary material, the genes). The bones and teeth studied from large
              samples of skulls and dentitions by such scholars as William Howells and
              Christy Turner respectively, suggested that all living peoples were closely
              related,   but showed an approximate north/south division. 27 Europeans,
              Mongoloids (East Asians) and native Americans were similar and formed one
              group, while Africans and Australians formed another. The geneticists on the
              other hand, working with the limited data about inherited characteristics
              available at the time (predominantly that of blood groups), proposed a primary
                                                                                          28
              east/west division, that is Africa and Europe versus the Far East.
                In 1974, the geneticists Masatoshi Nei and Arun Roychoudhury advanced
              yet another theory.    They found that differences between the protein and
              enzyme material of Europeans and Mongoloids were fairly small, suggesting
              that the two populations were quite closely related. Differences between these
              peoples and black African populations, however, were much greater; this
                                                                                         29
              indicated   that   Africans   had   a   longer   evolutionary   history.         Nei and
              Roychoudury even proposed a date for the original split between Africans and
              the rest (about 110,000 years ago) and a date of c. 40,000 years ago for the
              European/Mongoloid split. Hardly anyone took any notice. But thirteen years
              later, research originating at Berkeley in California drew comparable

              conclusions, this time with a much greater impact.


              Human mitochondrial DNA
              Our hereditary material is made up of chains of genes consisting of a chemical
              called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Mitochondria (the tiny structures which




132
                             THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




                    Some Characteristics of Mitochondrial DNA


         • Mitochondria are small units which generate energy.
         • They exist independently of the cell nucleus, and have their own
           DNA (mtDNA).
         • This mtDNA has a rapid rate of evolution that is apparently quite
           constant over time; recombination with other genes does not
           occur.
         • Moreover most or all mtDNA is inherited from the mother; the
           mtDNA of a male generally dies with him.
         • Since new variation only occurs through mutation, at a seemingly
           constant rate, and through one parent only, mtDNA is a good
           candidate for charting population histories.




power our cells) contain a special form of DNA, known as mitochrondrial DNA
or mtDNA. The large    mtDNA molecule was singled out as a promising tool for
studying short-term evolutionary changes because of its peculiar mode of
inheritance: this    DNA, unlike any other in our bodies, is not inherited equally
from both parents via the chromosomes in the nuclei of our cells, but largely or
wholly from the mother, from the egg. This means that the origin of our
mtDNA potentially stretches without interruption via a whole series of
mothers into the distant past.
   As mtDNA is copied it sometimes suffers mutations or changes, accumu-
lated at about ten times the rate of our normal DNA. Since these distinct
mutations are copied from mother to child, they can be used to trace particular
lineages. As time passes, each lineage will accumulate more and more
mutations; the number of mutations or differences between them can therefore
provide a theoretical measure of evolutionary antiquity i.e. the greater the
diversity of mtDNA, the greater the amount of evolutionary change has taken
place. Following the mutations back along the family lineages must eventually
lead to acommon, hypothetical ancestress for all people alive today, often
known as Eve or 'our lucky mother'.
  When human mtDNA began to be studied in detail during the 1970s, it
became clear that all human mtDNA was basically very similar, suggesting that
only a few mutational differences had had time to build up between the major
geographical populations or 'races'. This implies that their common origin
could not have been far back in the past. When defined genetically, therefore,
modern humans seem to be recent in origin. To demonstrate that modern
humans originated within the Pleistocene, University of California at Berkeley
biochemists Rebecca Cann (pi. 98) and Allan Wilson proposed that mtDNA in
all   animals changed at a constant rate of about 3 per cent per million years.
Initial studies     suggested, working backwards from today, that the original




                                                                                     133
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




                                                                    43   The controversial tree of
                                                                    mitochondrial   DNA relationships
                                                                    published by Cann, Stoneking and
                                                                    Wilson in Nature, 1987. It shows in
                                                                    diagrammatic form the genetic
                                                                    divergence between modern humans,
                                                                    whose ancestors came from Africa,
                                                                    Asia, Australia, New Guinea and
                                                                    Europe. As well as suggesting a clear
                                                                    split between African and non-

                                                                    African groups, it reconstructed a
                                                                    hypothetical female ancestor for all
                                                                    modern mtDNA types; she was
                                                                    African and lived around 200,000
                                                                    years ago.
                     0.2   0.4   0.6   0.6   0.4   0.2
                           Sequence divergence %




              common ancestress of all people lived about 400,000 years ago, during the last
              days of the species Homo erectus. 30 Thus, the subsequent evolution of modern
              people was probably a world-wide, multiregional process.
                Subsequent, more detailed research, however, has not only more than halved
              the estimated age of Eve, but has also indicated that she most probably came
              from Africa. For African lineages revealed more diverse types of mtDNA than
              any other present-day populations, which suggests that they had more time to
              develop such mutations. 31 The lineages of Europeans, Asians, New Guineans
              and Australians seemed to show far fewer mutations and therefore a much
              younger date of differentiation. This conformed neatly with the Out of Africa 2
              model, although an origin of roughly 200,000 years ago and a dispersal from
              there about 100,000 years ago seemed too ancient compared with the fossil
              evidence. The date of the earliest known modern humans in Africa still appears
              too early to match the               mtDNA estimate (since the oldest fossil remains
              probably date to 130,000 years); but we now have ESR and TL dates from
              Skhul and Qafzeh which do seem to show early modern people in western Asia,
              adjacent to Africa at around 100,000 years ago, as we saw in Chapter 5. 32 Thus
              we have evidence of a genetic migration from the African centre.

              Second thoughts on mtDNA
              Genetic support for the Out of Africa 2 model of modern human origins has,
              not surprisingly, been attacked by supporters of multiregional evolutionary
              continuity. Their arguments against            mtDNA calibration have mostly focused



134
                                                                                      -

                                  THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



on the accuracy and consistency of the rate of genetic mutation. Different parts
of the mtDNA molecule evolve at different rates, meaning there is much debate
about the appropriate rate to use, and indeed whether it is even very constant.
(The use of chimpanzee mtDNA data to calibrate human DNA divergences
has also been challenged.) Given the uncertain rate of change, multiregionalists
argue that the pattern of dispersals could just as well fit the spread of Homo
erectus from Africa i million years ago as that of modern humans from Africa
much more recently. 33
   Furthermore, the computer program PAUP (Phylogenetic Analysis Using
Parsimony) used by Cann, Wilson and their colleagues is unable to prove
conclusively an African origin from present             mtDNA data. Much more
information will be needed to be able to demonstrate this, although the results
of PAUP and other analytical techniques continue to favour an African origin
over any other.
   On the other hand, new analyses of mtDNA derived from chimpanzee data
and from recent human colonizations (for example in New Guinea) suggest
that the human       mtDNA ancestor most probably lived between 140,000 and
130,000 years ago (although it is admitted that a wide range of dates is possible
from as long ago as 400,000 years ago to as recently as 60,000 years ago), which
does concur reasonably well with the available fossil evidence for the earliest
modern fossils. 34

Nuclear DNA
The conclusions from mtDNA databases on a total of some 5,000 modern
individuals are strongly supported by the even larger one now building up for


                                                                            IV                 VI    VII
44 Scientist Luigi Luca
Cavalli-Sforza and his                                                           co
                                                           CO                             CO
colleagues compiled a family tree                          c                     %                  •0
                                                           CO                             CD        c
on the basis of the products of                                        CO
                                                                                 3        Oc        CO
                                               CO
                                               -0          3           c
                                                                       CO                 CO
                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                    c
nuclear DNA.   They found that                                         -0
                                                                                 to       V)        CO
                                               CO          1
                                                           CD
                                                                       _c
                                                                                 CO
                                                                                 CD
                                                                                          .0
modern humans are divided into                 co                                .c                 2
                                                           r           CD
                                                                       E
                                                                                                    to
                                                                                                    3
seven major groups, with a                     CO                                         CO
                                                           z           <                  a.        <
primary split between Africans
and non-Africans and another
Eurasian! South Asian split.




                                               Rootstock of Homo sapiens




                                                                                                           135
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



              normal (nuclear)   DNA and     its products (such as blood groups and enzymes). 35

              This work generally shows hierarchical clustering (that is, nested clusters)
              which indicate a primary African/non-African split and a secondary Eurasian/
              Southeast Asian split (fig. 44). In other words, the implication is that modern
              humans originated in Africa, and a population later dispersed from there which
              in turn split in Asia. One descendant group gave rise to present-day Europeans,
              Mediterranean peoples, Indians, native Americans, Inuits and East Asians,
              and the other group to Southeast Asians and Polynesians as well as Australians
              and New Guineans. According to this research, the origin of all the diversity in
              the nuclear   DNA of modern humans could be even more recent than that of the
              mtDNA: the ancestral population would probably have lived in Africa about
              100,000 years ago, much in line with Nei and Roychoudhury's 1974 estimate. 36
              So this calibration, also, suggests an African genetic origin for modern people,
              long after the time of Homo erectus, and even after the differentiation of the
              Neanderthals. Once again, supporters of multiregional evolution question the
              calibration, but none of them have so far produced any alternative evidence that
              can convincingly tie the relationships of the middle Pleistocene Europe and
              Asia fossils to the genetic patterns      now reconstructed for recent human
              evolution.
                A final point about nuclear DNA calibrations is that in several analyses, the
              genetic differentiation within areas such as Australia and New Guinea is about
              40 per cent of the total human variation, and the Americas about 20 per cent.
              Since Australia and New Guinea were probably colonized about 60,000—
              50,000 years ago and the Americas probably less than 30,000 years ago, and
              assuming     a constant rate   of genetic diversification, the whole of human
              variation could have arisen in the last 150,000 years. This is consistent with the
              Out of Africa 2 model (rather than an origin 1 million years ago or more as
              proposed by the multiregional camp).



              New light on the dark continent
              To summarize, we have seen how Africa has moved from a marginal position in
              the story of modern human origins to a central one. An excellent fossil sequence
              records an evolutionary metamorphosis from ancient specimens such as Bodo
              and Broken Hill, through transitional ones such as Ngaloba and Jebel Irhoud,
              to early modern forms like those from Klasies, Border Cave and Omo Kibish.
              The dating of these fossil samples is now more accurate, apparently indicating
              that the transition to modern humans had        happened by 100,000 years ago,
              during the African Middle Stone Age (equivalent to the European Middle
              Palaeolithic). But was this transition unique to the African continent as the Out
              of Africa 2 model would imply, or was it part of a world-wide multiregional
              transformation? The greater age now being assigned to African transitional
              specimens such as Ngaloba, Singa and Irhoud certainly hints at an evolutionary
              precedence for Africa, and this is supported by the lack of evidence for
              comparably early transitions in other regions of the world.




136
                                  THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



   Years          AFRICA                              EURASIA                              EAST ASIA/AUSTRALASIA
    ago
             Afalou                                                                 Zhoukoudian
   30,000                                    Cro-Magnon       i                                               Mungo        WLH-50
                                             Mladed               Saint-Cesaire
                       Modern                Ksar Akil
                                                              |




                                                              I   Le Moustier                           Niah
                 Homo sapiens                                 J
   50,000                                [
                                             Amud                 La Chapelle
                                         i   Kebara               Guattari
             Border Cave                 l




  100,000    Klasies     Guomde              SkhQI            Neanderthals
             Omo Kibish                      Qafzeh                                 Xujiayao                               Ngandong
                                             TabQn                Saccopastore      Maba
             Jebel Irhoud Ngaloba L                      j
                                                                  Krapina           Dali
                                                                  Biache
                                 Archaic Homo                   Ehringsdorf
             Broken Hi          sapiens" or Homo
                                                             _ _§^B ns c_qrnb e _
                                heidelbergensis
  250,000                                                         Atapuerca         Jinniu Shan           |   Hexian       Ngawi
                                                                  Petralona
             Elandsfontein       Ndutu                            Bilzingsleben                   r-      1



             Bodo Sale                                            Arago             Yunxian       [     Zhoukoudian    Sambungmachan
  500,000    Baringo                                              Mauer
             Olduvai fernifine                                                                          Lantian        Sangiran
11,000,000   Olduvai                                  Dmanisi                               Homo erectus


45 Possible classification of some of the fossil hominids of the later Pleistocene.




   Genetic data provide an independent source of information and largely
favour an       Out of Africa            2   interpretation;          the    calibration     is       critical    in

differentiating between the original dispersal out of Africa of Homo erectus and
the much later exodus of early modern people. The larger genetic diversity
between Africans is certainly suggestive of a relatively greater antiquity for
African differentiation, while the overall low level globally of genetic diversity
in humans (in both         mtDNA and nuclear DNA) favours a recent origin, most
probably within the last 150,000 years. So, even though there is still much to
explain concerning the rate and                      mechanism of mutation in nuclear and
mitochondrial DNA, the weight of genetic evidence is very much on the side of
the Out of Africa 2 model. 37 While                   mtDNA has been used (very controver-
sially) to   suggest that there was a complete replacement by the Moderns of
populations of Ancients such as Neanderthals and the Asian descendants of
Homo erectus following an Out of Africa 1 dispersal, 38 the nuclear DNA results
cannot be used so definitively. We do not know, and may never know, to what
extent there was intermixture between the new peoples and the Ancients -
though the European evidence, as we will see in Chapter 8, does help to
illuminate the answer to this question.



Modern humans in the Far East and Australia
We have seen in this chapter that Africa has yielded evidence of the anatomical
transition     between ancient and modern humans, and we                               will discuss the




                                                                                                                                    137
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND! THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




                                    Racial Features and the Epicanthic Fold



                     Modern humans around the world vary greatly in physical
                     appearance, and this can be partly related to the environment in
                     which their ancestors lived. 39 We have already discussed how
                     differences in human body shape can be correlated with hot or cold
                     environments; such characteristics are inherited, so that after
                     forced or voluntary migration Afro-Americans still retain an
                     'African'    physique, while white Australians retain their basic
                     European body shape. Although individual skin colour is subject to
                     some variation (for example from sun tanning) this too is predomi-
                     nantly an inherited characteristic, as we can see from the same
                     Afro-American and Australian examples. So variations in modern
                     skin colour are undoubtedly related to the different levels of
                     ultraviolet (UV) light in sunlight to which populations were exposed
                     in the past. Although excessive exposure causes skin cell damage,
                     which can lead to skin cancers (the highest reported level today is
                     in white Australians), UV light is used by special cells under the skin

                     to synthesize essential vitamin D, which may not always be
                     obtained in sufficient quantities from the diet (leading to diseases
                     such as rickets). Different human pigmentation levels (and there-
                     fore skin colours) are the result of compromises between the need
                     for protection from excess UV (in intense sunlight) and the
                     requirements of the body for vitamin D synthesis (towards the poles
                     sunlight and UV levels are reduced). Tropical populations thus
                     need higher protection from UV damage and can afford to be dark-
                     skinned because they should still receive sufficient UV for vitamin D
                     production, while high-latitude populations need to be relatively
                     unpigmented to get the full benefit from reduced UV levels, with
                     little   risk of skin damage.
                        A more puzzling 'racial' feature is the epicanthic eye fold found
                     on the upper eyelids of most East Asian people (Mongoloids). This




              European evidence in Chapters 8 and 9; but what of other regions of the world?
              Vast areas of India and Southeast Asia are still virtually terra incognita to the
              palaeoanthropologist, but China, Java and Australia have produced important
              data on modern human origins.


              China
              The fossils from Dali (pi. 76) and Maba, which may date from between 200,000
              and 100,000 years ago, are certainly not borderline Moderns of the sort known
              from Africa at the same period, but neither are they as primitive as Peking Man
              or as specialized as the Neanderthals. 40   We do not know when modern people
              first appeared in China, but the remains of several individuals excavated from

              the Upper Cave at Zhoukoudian, and now believed to be about 25,000 years




138
                             THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




         extra fold of skin obscures part of the eye surface nearest to the
         nose. The fold is also common in native Americans and Polyne-
         sians (presumably indicating a close genetic relationship to East
         Asians) and in Khoisan peoples of southern Africa (where it
         definitely does not). One theory has been that the Asian eye fold
         was selected to provide protection against the cold, since the skin
         fold contains a potentially insulating layer of fat, as well as
         protecting the eyes from the glare (reflected sunlight and UV) of
         snow-covered ground. However, this idea does not account for the
         Khoisan eyefold (unless it is for protection from desert sun glare),
         nor for its general presence in Down's Syndrome children - of
         whatever race - who have abnormal chromosomes which affect
         facial growth before birth. An important clue to the origin of the
         feature is that most foetuses have an epicanthic fold which
         gradually disappears before birth or during the first years of life, but
         in Down's Syndrome children and in the adults of certain popula-

         tions the eyefold persists. The most clearly correlated feature is
         upper facial flatness and minimal development of a prominent
         nasal bridge between the eyes. As European children develop after
         birth, the nose and middle of the face become more prominent, but
         this does not happen in Down's Syndrome individuals or oriental
         populations, so it seems that the eyefold may just represent the
         normal form of the eye in humans whose upper nose is very flat.
         Facial flatness itself could be related to climatic adaptation, or it
         may simply be a feature retained from the earliest modern
         humans and their immediate African ancestors who had very flat
         faces. We surmise, therefore, that epicanthic folds were common
         in early modern people and our African ancestors, but were
         almost certainly not found in the Neanderthals with their beaky
         noses.




old,   do not look like intermediates between ancient and modern Chinese.
Instead, they look more like the Cro-Magnons (pi. 75). If these remains do
represent early Mongoloids, then most of the distinctive modern Mongoloid
                                                                41
features must have evolved during the last 25,000 years.             This is a far shorter
timescale than is generally believed, but it is not an impossible one.


Java and Australia
In Java, the descendants of"'Pithecanthropus' (Homo erectus) were probably still
living   on the banks of the Solo River 100,000 years ago, near present-day
Ngandong where a number of their skulls and a couple of leg bones have been
found. 42 These Javanese Ancients may have lived on in splendid isolation until
their world was disturbed by the arrival of early modern people about 60,000—




                                                                                             139
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND! THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



                               Zhoukoudian   •




     46 Possible migration routes to New Guinea and Australia at periods of lower sea level, when the Sunda
            and Sahul land shelves were exposed, and some important sites of early human occupation.
                            THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS




47 A comparison of the robust Willandra Lakes braincase (IVLH-50, left) and the Ngandong
cranium XI from jfava.




50,000 years ago. But whether their genes could be found in                        modern
Australians is still uncertain.
  Australia was probably colonized by sea crossings about 55,000 years ago,
although the exact anatomical nature of these pioneers remains unknown. By
30,000 years ago, southeastern Australia was inhabited by peoples showing a
wide range of skeletal characteristics. 43 Some (such as those from Lake Mungo
- one of     the   Willandra     lakes   - and    Keilor)   were    as   gracile   as   the
contemporaneous Cro-Magnons of Europe, while others (such as the poorly
dated Willandra Lakes 50 [WLH 50] braincase and the later Kow Swamp
fossils) were distinctly more robust: pis. 77, 78.       These latter remains can be
interpreted in a variety of ways.        Some scholars, for instance, believe they
resemble the primitive Moderns of Africa and Asia whereas proponents of
multiregional evolution have pronounced them reminiscent of the Java and
Ngandong peoples, from whom they could have evolved.
  There are two main views about the causes of this skeletal variety. One,
supported by multiregionalists Alan Thorne and Milford Wolpoff, argues that
the variation reflects two separate evolutionary origins: the gracile line having
entered from mainland Asia via an eastern island-hopping route; and the
robusts representing descendants of people like those known from Ngandong
in Java, who entered via a western route. 44 The latter robust lineage would thus

have stretched back to Dubois' 'Pithecanthropus'.               The two     populations
gradually mixed to produce a highly variable population which, even today, has
been claimed to retain 'the mark of ancient Java': the flattening of the frontal
bones above the brows. The alternative view is that of researchers like Peter
Brown, who argues that a physically varied Australian population could have
evolved within Australia, as human populations diversified in behaviour and
local adaptations during the late Pleistocene. 45 The bulk of the genetic data for

Australia tends to support the idea of one basic origin for native Australians,
with a continuing input of some new genes from the north. But whether a
contribution from the Ancients of Java was added to that of the descendants of
the Out of Africa 2 pioneers is still unclear.




                                                                                              141
THE DARK CONTINENT AND BEYOND: THE ORIGIN OF HOMO SAPIENS



                One possibility that emerges from recent genetic, fossil and archaeological
              data is that there was in fact more than one modern human dispersal into the
              Far East. The early one could have been carried out by descendants of people
              like those at  Skhul and Qafzeh from western Asia. This early eastwards
              dispersal would have been at a Middle Palaeolithic technological level and
              retained more of the rather primitive features of the ancestral populations (for
              example relatively strong brows, big faces and big teeth). These could even
              have been added to by local evolution or by contact with the last archaic peoples
              of Southeast Asia during the dispersal into Australasia some 60,000-50,000
              years ago. Then there was a second dispersal with the spread of Upper
              Palaeolithic technologies in Asia after 50,000 years ago. These more Cro-
              Magnon-like populations are perhaps represented by fossils such as those from
              the Zhoukoudian Upper Cave in China and Lake Mungo in Australia. Such a
              model would account for the early physical variation in Australia and the
              supposed Ngandong-like features of       WLH     50. However, a fundamental
              problem with this and any multiple migration scenario into Australia is that
              there is no supporting evidence for the existence of separate migrations from
              the archaeological evidence (e.g. stone tool typologies).


              Having   briefly     reviewed the anatomical evidence from the Far East and
              Australia,     now time to see what light the behavioural (archaeological)
                           it is

              evidence can throw on the question of modern human origins, by first returning
              to the homeland of the Neanderthals.




142
                                   CHAPTER 7

             The Archaeology of the Ancients



In this chapter we will discuss the archaeology of the Neanderthals and their
contemporaries elsewhere in the Old World. As a record of material culture,
this archaeological evidence can provide an enormous amount of information

about the behaviour of the Ancients. We will use studies of the Neanderthals
(whose homelands - Europe and the Middle East - have been the focus of more
research than any other region in the Old World) as a framework with which to
build a wider picture of the Ancients in general. Our main aim is to establish the
similarities and differences in behaviour between the various populations of
Ancients, patterns which we can then contrast in Chapter 9 with those of the
Moderns, allowing us     finally   to   examine the arguments      for behavioural
continuity or replacement.
  The Middle Palaeolithic,      the era of the later Ancients including the
Neanderthals, probably started between 250,000 and 200,000 years ago. It was
followed in many parts of the world some 40,000 to 30,000 years ago by the
Upper Palaeolithic, a period marked by different techniques of stone working,
additions to the cultural inventory such as art and architecture, and evidence
for population expansion into      new lands and continents - all associated
                                                               1




exclusively as a cultural package with the Moderns.
  Over the lengthy duration of the Middle Palaeolithic - at least 10,000
generations - and across the vast regions of the world inhabited by the
Ancients, there were local differences in settlement, technology and the
organization of survival and social life. These differences are often subtle and
can only be detected through the detailed study of the techniques of flaking
stone, or butchering    and transporting animal carcasses. Studies of such
diversity within the uniformity2 of the archaeology of the Middle Palaeolithic
have replaced earlier views that either trends in technological progress could be
traced within this period 3 or alternatively that no change took place at all. 4
  Our enquiry into the archaeology of the Neanderthals (and the Ancients in
general) will begin with a review of the chronology of the Middle Palaeolithic
and its division from the Lower Palaeolithic. We will then turn to evidence for
the ever-increasing complexity of life, starting with the most readily available
data: that from the stone tools (introduced in Chapter 3). The typology of stone
tools has   been largely superseded by models of behaviour that concentrate
more on the 'biography' of the implement - how it was made, used,
resharpened, recycled, changed shape and finally thrown away. Rather than
classifying tools into types (such as points and scrapers) and quantifying the
proportions of each type in an excavated assemblage, the current practice is




                                                                                     143
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




                               Stone Tool Typology of the Middle Palaeolithic


                    The shapes of stone tools are compared and classified in what is
                    known as typological analysis. Once a stone flake has been
                    knapped (see box pp. 56-57) it can either be used without further
                    modification or it can be retouched to change the shape and angle
                    of the working edge, or resharpened to obtain a fresh cutting edge
                    of   unmodified flint.     In   the process of retouch the flake                in effect
                    becomes the core, and through controlled flaking of the edge it can
                    be thinned or the edges shaped. These retouched flakes are often
                    described as tools and a representative selection is shown in
                    fig. 48. Distinctive Middle Palaeolithic flake tools include points,

                    scrapers and denticulates (notched pieces), and tanged tools.
                    Within these broad classes are a variety of forms and it is the
                    business of the typologist to order and classify them.
                       We owe much of our present thinking on Middle Palaeolithic
                    typology and technology to Francois Bordes (1919-1981), who
                    standardized procedures and introduced a quantitative approach
                    to the discipline. Bordes' study focused on the lithic material from
                    southwest France, consisting of 63 tool types. 5 He made compari-
                    sons between the tool assemblages from different levels - within
                    and between sites - on the basis of certain simple technological
                    indices. He also quantified the different methods of tool manufac-
                    ture, including the Levallois technique (see box on p. 149), and the
                    extent of blade production.
                      Bordes had expected to find enormous variation between the tool
                    types and techniques from different levels and sites, but he


                     48 Eight common types from Franqois Bordes              list   o/6j Middle Palaeolithic
                    stone tools. 3 Levallois point. 6 Mousterian flake point, ij Convex-concave side
                    scraper. 23 Transverse side scraper. 30 End scraper. 32 Burin (the arrows point
                           to the chisel-like facets)   .   38 Naturally backed knife. 43 Denticulate.




144
                                                             THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS




discovered to his great surprise that the proportions of tools and
methods of manufacture within each assemblage almost always
fell into one of five groups:


1   La Quina: low in Levallois technique (<10%)
2 La Ferrassie: high in Levallois technique (14-30%)
3 Typical
4 Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition: A with hand axes; B without
    hand axes
5 Denticulate

  He concluded that these five types of assemblage were manufac-
tured by five different Neanderthal tribes, that coexisted but had
very little contact with each other. We will return to Bordes' theory
later.
   The names for many of the retouched flakes reflect their apparent
function. We can usually make no more than an intuitive guess as to
their function, although studies of the damage to edges from
utilization have shown that some of the pieces we call scrapers
were indeed most probably used for that task. 6
     Elsewhere in the Middle Palaeolithic world these same func-
tional descriptions are commonly used and, as might be expected,
added to. From the Sahara and Maghreb of northern Africa come
many examples of tanged tools known as Aterian points, some of
which at c.100,000 years old might represent the oldest examples of
deliberate  retouching to increase the effectiveness of hafted
               7
projectiles. The East African assemblages have pieces known as
sinew-frayers. 8 Large core tools have been found in Middle Stone
Age contexts in the Zaire basin. The Lupemban pick and lanceolate
are distinctive elements in what is termed the heavy duty
component of such assemblages. 9 In contrast the light duty
component is made up of scrapers and flake tools. 10


    4Q Middle Stone Age artifacts from Africa: a Lupemban pick; b lanceolate
                Lupemban pick; c sinew fray er; d Aterian point.




                                                                      100
                                                                     _i
