              earlier, at sites in the   Middle East and southern Africa. In our opinion,
              therefore, the European industries were not the result of local evolution, the
              independent invention by Neanderthals of Upper Palaeolithic technology, but
              rather an imitation of technology of the incoming Moderns. One reason for this
              view is that - in contrast to the PUP - all the European industries are either
              contemporary with or postdate the appearance of the earliest Aurignacian
              industry, which is firmly associated with anatomically modern people.
                If the Neanderthals were responsible for the Chatelperronian, we can date
              their demise by the disappearance of their industry.   We can deduce, therefore,
              that the Neanderthals were gone from western Europe by 31,000 years ago. 4
              Apart from Saint-Cesaire, there is little other physical evidence of the very last
              Neanderthals but    this   does include a lower jaw from Zaffaraya Cave in
              southeastern Spain, some teeth from one of the Arcy caves (Renne) in France,
              an adolescent skeleton and the remains of a child from Le Moustier, and
              various skeletal parts from the cave of Vindija in Croatia. Sadly, the Vindija
              remains seem to have suffered badly before excavation since some show signs of
              burning and cut marks; and the Le Moustier fossils suffered badly afterwards -
              the child's remains were lost soon after their discovery and the adolescent
              skeleton was partially destroyed by the allied bombing of Berlin in 1945. The
              Vindija remains are especially controversial, because it is claimed that some
              were found in a level containing an Aurignacian bone point. 5 If this were so, it
              would be the only such association between the Neanderthals and the
              Aurignacian, but there are too      many uncertainties in     the excavation to
              guarantee the association; direct radiocarbon accelerator dating might help to
              establish the respective ages of the bone point and the hominids.
                The Vindija finds are also interesting in their own right because, compared
              with Saint-Cesaire, they suggest that a less robust late Neanderthal population
              was living there. However, it is unclear whether these Neanderthals were less
              robust because they were physically smaller than average; as a result of gene
              flow from contemporaneous early Moderns; or because they were evolving
              beyond the 'typical' Neanderthal morphology. If the last were the case, the
              multiregionalists could claim the Vindija individuals as intermediates between
              the Neanderthals and early Moderns; but        we believe the remains are too




182
                                                                             THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



incomplete (and seemingly rather late) to make any convincing case.                        The
Neanderthal remains from La Ferrassie in France, which some archaeologists
believe came from a family cemetery, might also be relatively late in time, since
they are not necessarily associated with the 'La Ferrassie' variant of the
Mousterian also found at the site.


Close encounters of a European kind

So, the picture we have of Europe between 40,000 and 30,000 years ago is of an
encounter between long-established natives and an incoming population. The
newcomers were one step ahead                   technologically,   and were     fully   modern
anatomically. But that does not mean, as is often assumed, that they were fully
European-looking: in fact they were physically unlike their successors of the
last   10,000 years. Their faces were flatter, with more prominent cheek bones
and lower, less prominent noses. Their skulls were larger, longer and relatively
lower. As we have mentioned, some of them - especially the males - had rather
bulging occipital bones, reflecting the large occipital lobes of the brain within.
Because this area is also particularly prominent in the Neanderthals, it is one of
the reasons put forward for including the Neanderthals in modern European
ancestry; but the feature          is   also    found   in   Moderns well away from the
Neanderthal zone (in Africa, South America and Australia), so it may reflect a
parallel development in modern humans rather than a significant evolutionary

link to the Neanderthals. The same may be said for the common presence of a
mandibular foramen in both Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons. The teeth and
jaws of the Cro-Magnons are larger than in modern Europeans, as was average
stature and (probably) lean            body weight. Estimates put early Cro-Magnon
height at about 1 .84    m (6   ft 1   in) in males and 1 .67   m (5   ft 6 in) in females, with

lean body weight at perhaps 70 and 5 5 kg ( 1 54 and 1 2 1 lb) respectively. So while
body weight was comparable with that of Neanderthals, the weight was
distributed differently, and the body proportions certainly contrasted strongly,
an indication of possible warm adaptation in the ancestors of the Cro-Magnons.
Compared with modern European body weights - about 70 kg ( 1 54 lb) in males
and 58 kg (128 lb) in females - the Cro-Magnons were quite similar, but they
were tall in comparison with their modern European counterparts, who average
about 1 .75   m (5   ft 8 in) in males   and 1 .62 m (5 ft 4 in) in females. There was also
a whole range of differences between Cro-Magnon and Neanderthal skeletons,

in such details as femoral shape and pelvic shape. One thing the Neanderthals

and early Moderns did share, however, was a larger average brain size than
present-day humans, including                  modern Europeans. As we discussed             in
Chapter 4, this may be related to the heavy body size of both the early European
groups.
   So where did the Cro-Magnons come from? Apparently not from the
Neanderthals, who went their own way in evolutionary terms over a 200,000-
year period or more, a trajectory which took them away from the Cro-Magnons
in features such as face and nose shape, and body proportions, but parallel to




                                                                                                      183
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



              them or towards them (if you are a multiregionalist) in characteristics such as
              increased brain size and smaller teeth. If, as we suspect, the early modern
              people came into Europe bringing an early form of the Aurignacian tool
              industry (such as the one known at Bacho Kiro in Bulgaria), could they have
              evolved from people like the early Moderns of Skhul and Qafzeh? That seemed
              a reasonable enough proposition to the scholars who dubbed these finds 'proto-
              Cro-Magnons', 6 but if they are 60,000 years older than the Cro-Magnons, as
              suggested by the TL and ESR dates (Chapter 5), what happened in between? If
              the Skhul and Qafzeh samples represent a brief and premature Out of Africa 2
              expansion which came to nothing, there is no necessary connection between
              them and later anatomically modern humans. But if populations like Skhul and
              Qafzeh moved northwards and eastwards, they could have continued
              dispersing all the way to Australia, where humans may have arrived by 55,000
              years ago (Chapter 6). Apparently they did not move westwards into Europe for
              some considerable time after this, which leaves open the question of their
              relationship to the Cro-Magnons. According to the geneticists, modern
              Europeans and east Asians are closely related, with a possible divergence date
              of less than 60,000 years ago. If this is accurate, there may have been a post-
              Skhul/Qafzeh ancestral population for modern Eurasians and native Ameri-
              cans, probably separate not only from Africans, but from Australians as well.
              Whether these proto-Eurasians lived in Asia (e.g. in the Middle East or the
              Indian subcontinent) or North Africa is unclear, but all the evidence suggests
              that the Neanderthals were not challenged on their home territory in Europe
              until after 45,000 years ago.
                If we can accept, as seems likely, that the Aurignacian was associated with
              the spread of Cro-Magnons into Europe, then the timing and direction of their
              colonization can be reconstructed. 7 The earliest Aurignacian sites, more than
              40,000 years old, are found in the centre and east of Europe. The next oldest are
              in the northernmost Iberian peninsula, suggesting an initial southern extension

              of their range. By 36,000 years ago we find Aurignacian industries in southern
              Germany and by 34,000 years ago they are well established in southwest
              France. This pattern of dates emphasizes the refuge in which the last French
              Neanderthals lived and the marginal nature of peninsular Europe within the
              wider picture of human evolution. How different this is from the complex
              anatomical and archaeological sequences we have seen in the Middle East
              (Chapters 5 and 7)!
                We also have a good idea of the climatic background to the appearance of
              modern humans in Europe, from data such as French and Greek pollen cores. 8
              Around 60,000 years ago, Europe was relatively warm and wet. But over the
              next 20,000 years, the climate deteriorated markedly, reaching a cold, dry
              minimum by 45,000 years ago. For the following 15,000 years (until about
              30,000 years ago), the climate continued to fluctuate, but overall it improved.
              Some French sites record brief periods of mixed oak forests replacing more
              open vegetation, matching episodes of weathering in European caves; both
              indicate short, warmer interstadials during this time.




184
                                                                                                                 ~




                  .._
                        S5P*W
  w^
            ;'Jr?ZjSk
            '
                                           ^V                                      HS>v '^^
                                                                                       v
                                                                                   **?-^^^^^
                                                                                                             ^^^ ^^^H
 WTor   '




Wk'W                             \
                                                         ^H                ^^r
                                                                                                                                          ^^H

                                           --
                                                     ^^KL|
                                                                                   SI A                     ^^       ; *'"'                     ^H



                                                                                   Hf *^                     If 1                               Br
                   M
                                                    W
                            -A
            )
                 ^Wftm
                ^"^                  1 V            *-        .
                                                                      ""
                                                                           1                                     JfPl^fe,                       JPp

                                 "i             s
                                                                               .
                                                                                        7^g/^~j3 '»-   ^*/'*^tet-'<               <    trS^'




                             i
                                           8k >                   1
                                                                  |                                          *£'              "

                                                                                                                                      *«ftM
                  ^ i.
                                                                                                        .




                                                                  1
                        -




                                           L ^^-' 1      :
                                                             -v




    79 This comparison of the Neanderthal skull from La Ferrassie (left) and the early modern skull
    from Cro-Magnon emphasizes just how different the two peoples were.
                                                                                                                                                                                  .




                                                                      ^^^                                                         -
                                                                                                                                      ^^Sj^t^      "'-*.'
                                                                                                                                                            -



          jtfi
                     ja^m^-
                         -^a| gr <d
                           \,-                                                                                         W   '
                                                                                                                               ,j&M£fo£&3%a&L.
                                                                                                                                 'if''        ^^•'•f*^          ^^B       ~"*^^H




                                                                 ^'   ^                                >       ^w|     Ipfjs     i    ill     -*

                                                                                                               Wnbj|l^pHNL^n3|^MBife^                                                 K
                                                                              :




       Fill                                          ^BMl   <*   UnfL,                            ;

                                                                                                      f5                             i   ^^^M                   Moif
                                                                                                                                                                    >J^-^:
   !



         ^PlS                                    ^K>                                                                    '^ZK^^**|^ .-*
          TBJ
                                                                                    *   .
                                                                                            »'

                                                                                                                           HHk -^i^ '^k                                       s




            ^~       ^^B
                  3^fMi
                                        ^j&^^kV*
                                    -* ^-^
                                                     £H               -
                                                                                    M&&-r m*
                                                                                   /-C^""*!^.
                                                                                   *r     ^rms^Jm
                                                                                           **(Lv
                                                                                                  $w#
                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                               ^^<f«k
                                                                                                                                          .                  A
                                                                                                                                                            ^r
                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                          "'"•
                                                                                                                                                                          .




                iB*^
                n
                \,
                  * X
                                 >'"             -


                                                                 K.
                                                                          :       ,*& * , rk«r
                                                                                   "^-^zi^*^-    *id^H                                   > *iy
                                                                                                                                           ^BVvV-
                      ^^^H£*^SET-   -   f.jJB   tH
                                                                      ^^^                        .*• fl



                     ^ifl                                                                                                                     ***&&




Comparing Neanderthals and Moderns


8o {Top) Photograph of two French Neanderthals (La
Chapelle-aux-Saints, left and La Ferrassie, right) with Cro-
Magnon [, illustrating their facial dissimilarities.
8i (Above) Basal view of the Ferrassie Neanderthal (left) and
Cro-Magnon i. The skulls are of similar overall size, but the
Neanderthal has a flatter cranial base with retreating cheek
bones and the upper jaw positioned forwards.

82 (Above right) Neanderthal features are already apparent in
the nine-year-old Neanderthal child from Teshik Tash in
Uzbekistan (cast, right). Compared with that of a slightly
younger modern child, the Neanderthal skull is longer and
wider, with a developing brow ridge and a large face and nose.

83 (Right) A comparison of the Amud (cast, left) and Saint-
Cesaire fossils. Both represent relatively late Neanderthals in
their regions.
84 (Above) The rear profiles of an early modern skull (Pfedmosti
3, cast, left) and a Neanderthal (La Ferrassie).


85 (Below) Comparison of casts of the Jebel Irhoud (left) and
Qafzeh 6 skulls. Although Irhoud 1 has a more primitive vault,
their facial proportions are very similar.

86 (Bottom) The Qafzeh 9 early Modern (cast, left) and Tabun
Neanderthal may have been near contemporaries in the Middle
East about 100,000 years ago.
                                                         *
                                                             S'

                                                                  '
                                                       is*   '




                                                                  ^sv




87 (Above) Life-size reconstruction of a man using a
spearthrower. Developed by the Cro-Magnons, this
device represented a major advance in hunting
technology, since it could propel spears further and
with a much greater speed and accuracy than
hitherto.

88 {Below) Art, ornament, dress codes and jewelry
were significant developments during the Upper
Palaeolithic. This (reconstructed) necklace was made
from pierced fox teeth, dentalia shells and fossils
which may, on occasion, have been traded over large
distances.
The cultural explosion of the Upper Palaeolithic




89,90 The structured organization of living areas and
the construction of huts was unknown before the
Upper Palaeolithic. (Above left) Some 385 mammoth
bones, including over 95 mandibles, were excavated
at the site of Mezhirich in the Ukraine,   dating from
about 18,000 years ago. The bones are thought to
have formed the walls of a hut, reconstructed here. A
mammoth skull painted with hematite was also
discovered at the site. (Above right) Reconstruction
of a hypothetical Upper Palaeolithic domestic
dwelling. There is no evidence that the Neanderthals
built complex structures such as these.

91 (Left) The most famous Venus figurine, carved in
limestone, from Willendorf in Austria. Most of these
statuettes date to between 23,000 and 21,000 years
ago, at a time when the climate was deteriorating due
to the onset of the last glacial   maximum 18,000 years
ago.
                                                                  fy
92 (Right, above) Evidence for Middle Palaeolithic
art and symbolism is extremely rare. This piece of
bone from Bacho Kiro in Bulgaria bears heavily
incised lines, but it probably lacked any symbolic
meaning.
                                                          '.•.-

93,94 (Right) A lion-headed anthropomorphic
statuette, one of the earliest known works of art.
Carved from a small mammoth tusk this figure
dates to the Aurignacian (early Upper
Palaeolithic) more than 32,000 years ago. It was
found in the Stadel Cave of southern Germanv.
95 Franz Wcidenreich was one of the creators of the model of multiregional evolution. Here he is
pictured amongst remains from Zhoukoudian. Referred to as Peking Man, these fossils formed an
important part of his theory.
                                                                       ^'vjV
                                                          »
                                                              4 lira

                                                               f
                                                               &f*&%
                                                                   4


                                                          i

                                                      /
                                                          !^^~            1
                                                                              i \
                                                      I




Protagonists in the Neanderthal
debate




96 The participants of a 1986 conference at the
School of American Research in Santa Fe included a
number of prominent figures in the debate on
modern human origins: (back row, from left) Fred
Smith, Ofer Bar Yosef, Jean-Philippe Rigaud,
Milford Wolpoff and Lewis Binford; (front row)
Jean Auel (a conference sponsor), Chris Stringer,
Erik Trinkaus (conference organizer), Randall White
and Jane Buikstra (conference moderator).

97 Bernard Vandermeersch has excavated and
studied many important fossil hominids, including
those from Qafzeh, Kebara, Biache and
Saint-Cesaire.

98 Rebecca Cann, one of the pioneers of the use of
mitochondrial    DNA
                   in the reconstruction of human
evolution.
99 Milford Wolpoff, a champion of
multiregional evolution, meets the
Sangiran 17 skull of Homo erectus from
Java, which he believes could be
ancestral to present-day indigenous
Australians.

100 Chris Stringer with the Jebel
Irhoud 1 skull from Morocco, a
possible ancestor he believes for all
modern humans.
                                                                    THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



  It   was during the fluctuating climates of 45,000-30,000 years ago that
modern humans seemingly arrived in Europe and must have coexisted in a
general way with the last Neanderthals. However, we do not have the detailed
archaeological, fossil and chronological records to ascertain exactly how closely
the two biologically distinct groups lived. Did they, for instance, share the same
environments, the same valleys or even the same caves? We will look at this
question from the behavioural point of view in the next chapter, but here we
will consider whether the Cro-Magnons could have acted as 'Killer Africans'

(to use Milford WolpofFs choice phrase) and wiped out the Neanderthals they

encountered.
  In an area as large as Europe, with its varied environments and over a
timespan of perhaps 10 millennia, many different kinds of interactions could
have occurred (and probably did occur), ranging from avoidance to tolerance to
interbreeding, and from conflict and economic competition to friendship and
an exchange of ideas. As Paul Graves has suggested, if the Cro-Magnons passed
on some of their technological innovations to the Neanderthals, perhaps the
Neanderthals reciprocated by sharing their long experience of dealing with the
                                    9
Ice Age environments of Europe.         As we have already mentioned, there are
occasional hints of interbreeding between the two populations of hominids e.g.
the bulging occipital bone of one of the Cro-Magnon skulls, or the projecting
mid-face of one of the Moderns from Pfedmosti. We are not sure that such
features do in fact represent the result of interbreeding, but even assuming they
do, we believe that such instances were exceptions, and that there was minimal
gene flow (interbreeding) between the two populations.
  The question of whether the Neanderthals represented a distinct species
from modern humans depends on whether the anatomical and behavioural
differences between them and us are emphasized, or the features they share
with us. Their anatomy certainly suggests to us that they should not be
classified within our species, as does that of comparable samples from Asia and

Africa (e.g. Dali, Zuttiyeh, Broken Hill). But excluding a fossil human from
Homo sapiens on the basis of its anatomy does not necessarily imply that the
individual was unable to interbreed with       modern humans. Closely related
biological species are often interfertile, and may or may not produce fertile
offspring when they hybridize. Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons would have
been quite closely related, and genetically there may have been no barrier to
Neanderthal/Cro-Magnon interbreeding. It would probably have been
predominantly behavioural barriers that kept them distinct from one another.
The two populations would have contrasted physically, and may have had
major differences in language and gestural expressions. Hybrids, if they existed
and were    fertile,   may have been      discriminated   against   by the parent
populations, ensuring that the flow of genes between the parent populations
was restricted.
  If the Cro-Magnons became more skilled at coping with and exploiting the
European environments than the Neanderthals, the Cro-Magnon populations
and ranges would have increased. With only finite resources, the Neanderthals




                                                                                             193
THE FATE OF THE NEANDERTHALS



              would have suffered from economic competition unless they withdrew to more
              marginal areas (such as, in this context, the southern Iberian and northern
              British peninsulae). If the Cro-Magnons occupied the more favourable and
              sheltered lowland valleys, the Neanderthals would have had to occupy higher
              or less-sheltered ground. In a normal summer this would have posed them few
              problems, but in more inclement weather their populations would have been
              put under severe stress. They would have suffered from higher infant mortality
              rates and shorter lifespans. Repeated across various parts of Europe and over
              many centuries or even millennia, this attrition would probably have caused
              Neanderthal populations gradually to decline towards extinction.
                 In fact, using a computer-simulated model, archaeologist Ezra Zubrow has
              shown how rapidly the Neanderthals could have become extinct. 10 Assuming
              interaction between stable populations of Neanderthals and Moderns, a
              Neanderthal mortality rate only 2 per cent higher than that of the Moderns
              could have resulted in Neanderthal extinction within about 1,000 years. So,
              when run through the computer, we see unfolding the possible long-term
              demographic history of the interaction between the two populations. In
              Zubrow's words, the demographic fate of the Neanderthals thus simulated 'is
              not a photograph but the trail of death'.
                None of this, of course, explains exactly what took place as the local
              populations of Neanderthals were replaced. It is improbable, as Paul Graves
              has recently pointed out, that anything resembling a clash from recent colonial
              history took place, with one side packing all the resources, fire-power and
              know-how to triumph in an unequal contest. 11 But it is evident that the days of
              the Neanderthal era in Europe were numbered when the Cro-Magnons first
              arrived. The Neanderthals did not evolve into modern Europeans and their
              role in the shape of Europeans to come was minimal.
                 The exact relationship of Cro-Magnons to modern Europeans is, as we have
              said, still unclear. If their skull measurements are compared    with data from
              different modern populations, they are scattered in their affiliations. While the
              Mladec 1 woman seems European enough, many others (such as those from
              Pfedmosti and Cro-Magnon) seem allied to distant populations in Asia, Africa,
              Australia or the Americas. This does not mean that the Cro-Magnons were the
              ancestors of all these populations, but it may indicate that the Cro-Magnons
              were either racially undifferentiated, or that they represented a race or races
              with their own combination of features unlike any found today.




194
                                  CHAPTER 9


               Close Kin or Distant Relatives?



Right at the beginning of the book we asked whether the Neanderthals were
close kin or distant relatives, direct lineal ancestors to modern humans or not.
In order to answer this question we needed not only to examine the origins of
the Neanderthals,    what they looked like, where they lived and under what
conditions, and how they survived, but also to look at their more primitive
predecessors, Homo erectus, and the rise of their modern successors, Homo
sapiens.   We saw in Chapter 8 that the Neanderthals were probably extinct by
30,000 years ago and we discussed their fate from an anatomical point of view.
In this chapter we will investigate the question from a behavioural perspective,
comparing the behaviour of the Moderns with what we know of the behaviour
of the Neanderthals (Chapter 7). But first let us take a brief look at two popular
accounts of the Neanderthal demise.



Two popular fates for the Neanderthals
In Chapter 1 we saw some of the many, changing faces of the Neanderthals in
art,   science and fiction.   Not surprisingly, the Neanderthal story has also
received many different endings, although most of these ultimately seem to
favour either replacement or continuity, in some guise or other. According to
H.G. Wells (The Grisly Folk), for instance, the Neanderthals were brought to
bay over the long millennia of the Ice Age by the 'First True Men', who
invaded their lands and slaughtered them. Similar endings, in which the savage
is   subjugated by the civilized, have been repeated many times in fiction. For
example, at the same time that Wells was writing The Grisly Folk, Marjorie and
C.H.B. Quennell produced their children's book, Everyday Life in the Old
Stone Age. First published in 1921 they summed up the extinction of the
Neanderthals in the following terms: 'He had done as much as was possible for
him. His large head, with the thick frontal bones, must have been very good for
butting a brother Neanderthal, but it was no use against the stone wall of
advancing civilization, and like the Tasmanian and Bushman, the Red Indian
and Australian of nowadays, he fades out of the picture, and his place is taken
by a cleverer people.' With evolutionary 'dead ends', such 'mercy' killings
                          1




apparently came as something of a         relief.   The fate of the Neanderthals
symbolized what many then saw not only as the inevitable but also as the
desirable removal of other so-called primitives from the earth - an everyday
story of colonial folk.
     The popular alternative to an abrupt replacement of the Neanderthals is the




                                                                                     195
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               argument for survival. For example, Milford Wolpoff, a leading exponent of
               the multiregional model, likes to     tell   conference audiences that he sees a
               Neanderthal every morning in his shaving mirror. Even if the Neanderthals are
               not to be found on the bus or football field, there are many who believe they
               roam the margins of the civilized world. For example, in her book entitled (in
               the US) Still Living?: Yeti, Sasquatch and the Neanderthal Enigma the former
               archaeologist Myra Shackley makes the case that the strange creatures
               supposed to live in the mountains of the Old World - the Almas, Yetis and
               Abominable Snowmen - are in fact refuge pockets of Neanderthals. 2 The idea,
               purporting to be based on scientific evidence, was widely circulated in the
               Sunday Times magazine of 23 January 1983, where one of Maurice Wilson's
               paintings appeared under the headline 'Are these prehistoric people living
               today?'
                  But Shackley's evidence is as illusory as a melting footprint. In trying to link
               the Almas of the Caucasus and Pamirs of Outer Mongolia to the Neanderthals,
               she remarks: 'The characteristic skull shape - a long, low-vaulted cranium with
               prominent brow ridges and jutting jaw [sic] - is curiously reminiscent of
               descriptions of Almas, as is the recorded Neanderthal height of about 5 ft 6 in [our
               emphasis].' 3 This could just as easily be interpreted to mean that Neanderthals
               are alive and well and living wherever such features can be found. In reply to
               her assertion that 'it is certainly curious that 'wild men' in some shape or form
               crop up so consistently, associated with almost everybody who had a recorded
               culture', 4   we point out that the concept of primitiveness is the necessary
               invention of all civilizations. It is part of the inherited cultural baggage of the
               last 4,000 years: there is nothing curious about it. Such portmanteaux contain

               no half truths about human evolution, only a potential source for shaping
               cultural attitudes towards distant relatives and other cultures. Wilson's
               painting is a good example of presenting an argument about the past as an
               image; it is most certainly not evidence, as used by Shackley.



               A scientific fate
               Why are we so convinced that there is no place for Neanderthals in modern
               European and Middle Eastern ancestry? How can we be so sure that the major
               contribution to our present physical appearance and behaviour, whether we are
               European or Japanese, African or Inuit, came from a second wave of hominids
               out of Africa, this time of anatomically modern humans?
                  We believe there are two compelling lines of evidence. In the first place we
               have seen repeatedly in earlier chapters the evidence from our own biology, be it
               limb length or mtDNA, which points to a swamping of the Old World Ancients
               by Moderns who came from Africa. Africa is the only continent where the
               equivalent of a 'Neanderthal phase' in modern human ancestry - one of the
               central beliefs of the proponents of multiregional evolution - can be supported
               by anatomical and genetic evidence. In all instances, the trail leads us back to
                                                                                 5
               Africa as the single continental centre for our physical origins.




196
                                                                     CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES]



  What must be made clear is that biological replacement does not imply
genocide of the Neanderthals. As one of us (Chris Stringer) has recently
pointed out, the Neanderthals probably went with a whimper rather than a
bang. 6   The fate of the Neanderthals as we see it was one of a gradual
displacement to more marginal and less favourable environments (Chapter 8)
rather than defeat in     some   sort   of territorial battle. Yet such colonial
metaphors, as Wells elaborates in The Grisly Folk, are frequently used to
portray the fate of the Neanderthals. The truth is that we do not (and probably
never will) know the precise details of what occurred. We can only suppose that
many different pathways led to the same result, in contrast to the frequently
mistaken assumption that a common end must mean a single route.
  This introduces our second line of evidence for replacement, the behaviour of
Ancients and Moderns. In the         first   place   we need to consider if modern
behaviour and anatomy both originated in the same place, Africa. Certainly,
archaeological evidence of the earliest anatomically modern              humans in the
Middle East, from such sites as Qafzeh, suggests a more complicated picture
than a single centre for the origins of both modern physique and modern
behaviour. Secondly, what do we expect behavioural replacement to have
involved? Were Neanderthals, as an example of one regional population of
Ancients, incapable of adopting any or all the patterns of modern behaviour?
Or did they manage to incorporate into their existing routines some of the new
ideas about technology and the use of the environment? If so, the adoption of
how many new ideas would win the case for behavioural continuity? And would
the   speed   of this   adoption affect our decision           whether continuity or
replacement of behaviour best explains the archaeological record?
  In Chapter 7 we set out the evidence for the behaviour of the Ancients,
focusing in particular on the Neanderthals. In this chapter               we will again
concentrate on the European evidence, for              it   clearly illustrates   that the
behaviour of the Moderns was of a completely different order of complexity
from that of their predecessors.        We will argue that replacement of the
Neanderthals by the Moderns can be the only plausible explanation for these
differences in behaviour, given the absence of evidence for a gradual change
from one way of life to the other.
  We will investigate the major differences in behaviour between Ancients and
Moderns at the three levels we discussed in Chapter 7: the construction of
campsites, the use of the landscape, and expansion into new habitats. These
changes are summarized in the table overleaf, which chronicles the appearance
of some of the main elements of modern life, such as art, technology, houses and
colonization. The crucial part of the table to focus on is the 20,000-year period
(60,000 to 40,000 years ago)  when a number of these important aspects
developed   -  although by no means the entire cultural package that
characterizes modern humans. In order to avoid concentrating too heavily on
one small corner of the world (Europe), we have expanded the geographical
coverage of the table to include the first recorded evidence, anywhere, for the
traits which together define modern behaviour.




                                                                                                  197
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



                                             YEARS             AGO
                                           ooo          00°                    00°              ooo      ^ 0i0oo
              80                                                             ,0,           20
                             MIDDLE      PALAEOLITHIC                EARLY         UPPER         LATE
                                                                       PALAEOLITHIC              UPPER
                                                                                                PALAEO-
                                                                                                LITHIC

                                                                                                           >art
                                                                                                           ^bone tools
                                                                                                           ^blade technology
                                                                                                           ^ceramic technology
                                                                                                           ^body ornament
   a>   a)                                                                                                 ^artifact styles
   •c   o
   - o
   <o   c                                                                                                  ^   built hearths
                                                                                                           > structured living
                                                                                                               space and windbreaks
                                                                                                           ^cave 'burials'
                                                                                                           ^open site burials
                                                                                                           ^storage pits
                                                                                           o
                                                                                                           >huts
                                                                                                           -^microliths


                                                                                           o
                                                                                                           ^quarries
        0)


   ?    c                                                                                                  ^regional art
   .2   -C
                                                                                                           ^long-distance exchange
   d>   X
   £ 9                                                                                                     ^of raw materials
   5
   o
        TO
        c                                                                                                  ^chains of connection
   a)   .2
                                                                                                           ^long-term occupation of
   -J   <i>
                                                                                                             harsh environments
                                                                                                           ^social storage




                                                                                                           ^sea voyaging
                                                                                                               colonization of:
                                                                                                           ^      boreal forest

                                                                                                                   high mountains

                                                                                                                   deep deserts
   £    X
                                                                                                                   tropical rain forests

   il                                                                                                              small islands
   s 8
   —c *.o
   I    81

    £   z
    a £
   UJ
                                                                                                           ^spoken language

                                                                                                           ^increased forward
                                                                                                               planning




                   74    The changes in behaviour between the Ancients and Moderns, as captured in the archaeological
                        record. Clearly the period 60,000-40,000 years ago was a crucial one, for it is only after this
                        point that so many of the elements associated with modern behaviour are to be widely found.
                                                               CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES.'



  What the table shows is that certain basic survival techniques at the campsite
level show some continuity, among them stone blade technologies, 'burials' and

rudimentary windbreaks. Blades and burials (e.g. Qafzeh and Tabun) are
found before the all-important period 60,000 to 40,000 years ago; the first
artificial windbreaks only appear during it. But evidence for more intensive use

of landscapes, such as the long-distance movement of raw materials like amber
and shell is almost always found after 40,000 years ago. On the other hand,
expansion outside those areas of the Old World inhabited by the Ancients
probably did take place during the aforementioned 20,000-year period: dates of
50,000 or more years ago for the sea crossing to Australia and Papua New
Guinea demonstrate that technological innovation (boats) and colonizing
ability was taking place on a hitherto unknown scale. And this is a telling point,

as we shall see later, since the first humans who reached Australia were almost
certainly modern, both physically and behaviourally.
  Our aim in the rest of the chapter will be to flesh out this table and to discuss
the enormous changes in behaviour that took place in Europe 40,000 years ago
- changes which we believe convincingly prove that replacement, rather than
continuity, is the best explanation for current evidence.



LIFE AT THE FIRESIDE
The reader will recall from Chapter 7 that there is scant evidence for the
structured organization of living areas among any of the Ancients -
Neanderthals included. The Ancient's use of their living space, be it a
rockshelter or an open site, is unfamiliar to us, and even something as basic as a
permanent open-air, stone-lined hearth was absent in Europe until 60,000-
40,000 years ago (see table). Evidence for the constructon of huts, as we saw, is
even more elusive. We debated the issue of burial in Chapter 7; here we will
discuss   what further inferences can be drawn about         ritual   and religious
behaviour.   And finally, the absence until the Upper Palaeolithic of art,
ornament or items of display is particularly striking. We cannot blame poor
preservation for the scarcity of these 'modern' features, because some of the
locations inhabited   by the Ancients are among the best-preserved of the
Palaeolithic. So, taken together, this evidence suggests that the life-style of the
Ancients was very different from that of their successors.
  The Ancient life-style was not simply confined to the Neanderthals or
western Eurasians: throughout the Old World - from the Cape of southern
Africa, across the Indian subcontinent and Central Asia to the archipelagos of
Southeast Asia, and north again to China - we find a consistent archaeological
record. There may be regional variety in the typology of stone tools, but current
research suggests that the availability of raw materials and local patterns of land
use are probably largely responsible for the variety that did exist. The Ancients,
everywhere, displayed similar behaviour when it came to elementary spatial
organization, while the fact that they did not elaborate their material culture
makes it difficult to recognize that face in WolpofF's mirror.




                                                                                            199
     CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



                          Let us contrast this for a moment with the behaviour of the Moderns after
                        their arrival in   Europe 40,000 years ago. It is very striking just how much
                        spatial patterning there now is to the archaeological record.       This is the case
                        both in rockshelters such as Arcy-sur-Cure in northern France and at open
                        sites as widely scattered as the early levels at Kostenki on the   Don River, Dolni
                        Yestonice in Moravia and the        site   of Lommersum near Koln. 7      The new
                        organization of sites was clearly down to the Moderns for the most part, and
                        even in those rare instances where the Neanderthals seem to have been
                        responsible, we argue that the changes were influenced by the Moderns; they
                        were not developed independently by the Neanderthals.


                        The Neanderthals and the Chatelperronian
                        Changes in stone tool technology have traditionally been used as one of the
                        most important yardsticks with which to measure progress and development
                        during the Palaeolithic, but in fact tool types are often an unreliable gauge of
                        significant behavioural changes, as we shall now see.
                          Arcy-sur-Cure is a complex of caves in the Paris basin of which the Grotte du
                        Renne (Reindeer Cave) was excavated by a great pioneer of Palaeolithic spatial
                        archaeology, Andre Leroi-Gourhan. In this cave, he excavated a series of levels
                        which spanned the late Mousterian and earliest Upper Palaeolithic. The oldest
                        levels of the latter contained the distinctive points - with curved, steeply

                        blunted backs - of the Chatelperronian industry. Radiocarbon dates for level
                        VIII, in which these points were found, are of the order of 33,860 years ago, and
                        associated with the tools were a few pieces of carved bone and drilled animal
                        canines. In the lower level X, Leroi-Gourhan excavated a dozen living surfaces

     A Chdtelperroman   which contained mammoth tusks and traces of post holes left by stakes driven
25
point from Arcy-sur-    into the earth during hut construction.
Cure; possibly a          Major excavations at the Grotte du Renne took place in the 1950s. At that
Xeanderthal imitation
of Upper Palaeolithic
                        time opinion was divided about the status of this and other Chatelperronian
technology.             assemblages. As     we saw in Chapter 8, for instance, French archaeologist
                        Francois Bordes maintained that these distinctive points, and indeed the entire
                        technological style of the industry, was derived from the so-called late
                        Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition B. Other scholars were unconvinced,
                        wishing to see the Chatelperronian as a later intrusion into the area since it
                        contained a predominance of blanks struck from carefully prepared blade
                                                                                            8
                        cores, rather than the characteristic flakes of the Mousterian.
                          These blades are important. The prepared core techniques that must have
                        been used to produce them are a departure from both the Levallois and disc
                        core methods discussed in Chapter 7. Flaking the nodule to produce a core that
                        can then be rotated to keep striking offslender, parallel-sided blades was a truly
                        novel form of using raw material. But we have also seen that it was not an Upper
                        Palaeolithic innovation in the old sense of such a term, so it is not a reliable
                        indicator of the     different   flint-working techniques of the Ancients and
                        Moderns. We have also discussed the Howiesons Poort assemblages of blades




     200
                                                                CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



and microliths from Klasies River Mouth and other South African sites which
show that so-called Upper Palaeolithic technologies could exist in the Middle
Palaeolithic. The appearance and disappearance of comparable PUP (pre-
             9


Upper Palaeolithic) assemblages in the long sequences at Haua Fteah in Libya
and the Mount Carmel cave of Tabun adds a much wider geographical spread.
We would not be surprised if future research yields similar instances of PUP
assemblages sandwiched stratigraphically between regular Middle Palaeolithic
strata in other parts of Asia.

  A further complication comes from Anthony Marks' excavations at Boker
Tachtit in the Negev Desert. 10 This open site has four levels, the earliest dated
to 47,000 years ago.   Within this one sequence is evidence for the shift from
Middle to Upper Palaeolithic - flake to blade - technologies. However, one of
the end-products, a projectile known as an Emireh point, remains constant.
Indeed the careful refitting offtakes back to their original core shows that the
knapper started by making such points with a thoroughly Middle Palaeolithic,
Levallois technique. However, as the nodule was reduced in size the toolmaker
changed to an Upper Palaeolithic blade technique to knap the remaining
points. There is no clue as to which hominid produced this tool, and gave us a
transitional nodule in a transitional industry. It would be nice to think that an
Ancient began the knapping and a Modern finished it! So Boker Tachtit deals a
further blow to the already crumbling edifice of traditional Palaeolithic theory,
the demolition aided, as we have seen, by the discovery of the intermittent
appearance of pre-Upper Palaeolithic industries and the association at Qafzeh
and Skhul caves of Middle Palaeolithic stone tools with modern humans.
Similar contradictions    to     established   notions   have been raised by the
colonization of Australia by Moderns who produced only rudimentary stone
tools rather than a European-style, Upper Palaeolithic blade technology. The
earlier   appearances of blade technologies should not therefore be read as
support for behavioural continuity. 11
  To continue the erosion of long-held views about technology and biology, we
saw in Chapter 8 that the Chatelperronian of Europe is now widely thought to
be the handiwork of Neanderthals. A careful review by Francis Harrold of the
French material indicates that this can be supported stratigraphically, 12 while a
flush of new dates for old sites and more recent discoveries have demonstrated
the overlap between these assemblages and the first 'true' Upper Palaeolithic.
Among these new finds is the important Neanderthal skeleton from the French
cave of Saint-Cesaire. It came from a Chatelperronian level which now has a
thermoluminescence date of 36,300 years ago. The possible hut structure in
one of the Chatelperronian levels at Arcy-sur-Cure may also have been erected
by the Neanderthals.
   It is interesting to observe that the transition in this area to a blade-based

technology (the Chatelperronian) and the appearance of structures at campsites
(Arcy-sur-Cure) only occurs long after the Moderns arrived in central Europe
and the Iberian peninsula. Imitation rather than invention therefore seems the
most plausible explanation for the change in Neanderthal behaviour.




                                                                                            201
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?


               The Moderns and the Aurignacian
               The first 'true' Upper Palaeolithic industry - in the sense that it was made by
               anatomically modern humans and has all the technological features and artistic
               additions normally expected of the Moderns - is widely recognized to be the
               Aurignacian. Along with such memorably named tool types as strangled
               blades,    nosed    scrapers   and    the   small   edge-nibbled    Dufor's    bladelets,
               Aurignacian flint assemblages notably contained bone and ivory projectile
               points. Such items were absent in the earlier phases of the Middle Palaeolithic
               and are extremely rare         in the   world-wide pre-Upper Palaeolithic. These
               projectiles form a cultural marker of considerable significance for typologists.
                    The earliest dates for the Aurignacian in Europe come from excavations by
               Janusz Kozlowski in the Bacho Kiro cave in Bulgaria. 13 These have produced a
               distinctive blade-dominated assemblage now classified as Aurignacian, radio-
               carbon dated to more than 43,000 years ago. In eastern and central Europe
               Aurignacian assemblages are consistently earlier than in France, which seems
               to   be one of the last strongholds of flake-based Mousterian industries and
               indeed, as the Saint-Cesaire find shows, a last refuge of the Neanderthals
               themselves. In the Middle East, the earliest Levantine x\urignacian - at the
               Lebanese rockshelter of Ksar Akil - may be as early as 44,000 years old, 14 while
               we have already discussed the dates of 47,000 years ago for the transitional
               industries at Boker Tachtit.         These dates point to an eastern origin for the
               European Upper Palaeolithic. Furthermore, we saw in Chapter 8 that the
               Aurignacian is associated with the spread of anatomically modern humans into
               Europe.
                    Currently, the earliest dates for the western Aurignacian come from Spain.
               At the impressive cave site of El Castillo, south of Santander, careful re-
               excavation by Victoria Cabrera Valdes has produced a detailed stratigraphy
               and dates of between 37,700 and 40,000 years ago for the Aurignacian levels.
               The cave site of l'Arbreda in Catalunya is dated to 38,500 years ago. 15 Early
               dates for the Aurignacian within France come from the Abri Pataud, 34,000
               years ago, while the sites of Roc de Combe and Piage contain alternating levels
               of Chatelperronian and Aurignacian industries, further supporting our view of
               southwest France as a cultural and biological refuge for the Neanderthals.
               There is evidence from Zaffaraya Cave that southern Spain may have fulfilled
               the same role.
                    Also highly significant     is   the   appearance of    art   in   association   with
               Aurignacian tools. The earliest examples take the form of small sculptures from
               the southern German sites of Stadel, Geissenklosterle and Vogelherd. At the
               first,   an impressive lion-headed anthropomorph was painstakingly recon-
               structed by JoachimHahn from many hundred pieces of a small broken
               mammoth tusk (pis. 93, 94). And in southwest France, limestone blocks
               engraved     with   signs   interpreted     as   vulvae   have   been   excavated     from
               Aurignacian levels at the sites of La Ferrassie and the rockshelters at Castanet
               and Blanchard.
                    Pierced deer and fox canines, shells, and carefully made ivory beads are also




202
                                                                CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



commonly found in Aurignacian levels (pi. 88). Building on research by Marcel
Otte, archaeologist Randall White has made a detailed study of these, and
demonstrated the range of different manufacturing techniques required to
produce the ivory beads. 16 Interestingly, he concludes that some areas were
obtaining the ivory from elsewhere. Southwest France was one of these.
Although the distances involved cannot yet be determined, we know that
mammoth remains were very rare at the sites in this region, whereas people in
Germany generally had immediate access to ivory sources.


Art and symbolism

What is the significance of the appearance of art and ornament? We argued in
Chapter 7 that earlier items are unconvincing as evidence for symbolic
behaviour either because they lack a context where symbolism might be
required (such as a burial) or because they are unique examples, unrelated to
any wider system that used the repetition of design and shape as symbols for
action. In our view, therefore, the emergence of art during the Aurignacian
clearly suggests that   replacement rather than continuity took place in this
fundamental aspect of modern behaviour.
  Geoff Clark and John Lindly, however, have argued conversely for a slow
build-up in the use of art and the development of associated symbolic
behaviour. 17 The artistic explosion, at least as measured by quantity, occurs
according to them after the last glacial maximum 18,000 years ago, almost
20,000 years after the appearance in Europe of the Aurignacian. It is at this time
that we find many more carved and engraved objects in Europe, as well as the
painted caves of Franco-Cantabria. Prior to this period, Clark and Lindly see a
continuity in this aspect of behaviour from the Ancients, with only a gradual
accrual in the human artistic repertoire.
  We believe that Clark and Lindly are mistaken in their interpretation. We
disagree with their insistence that symbolic behaviour is something that can be
turned up and down like a light on a dimmer switch. On the contrary, arranging
behaviour according to symbolic codes is an all or nothing situation. The onset
of symbolic behaviour can be compared to the flick of a switch or, as John
PfeirTer   put it, a creative explosion. 18 Symbolism involves making mental
substitutions   and appreciating associations between people, objects and
contexts; once established, symbolism cannot simply be dropped or forgotten.
Furthermore, symbolic behaviour requires          memory and periodic renewal
through repeated     ritual.   The   objects   used in such    rituals   tend to be
standardized, leading to the creation of a shared art form.
  One of the interesting questions to emerge from this discussion is why such
geographical variation exists in the quality and quantity of ritual art and
ornament after 40,000 years ago (particularly since the symbolic behaviour
associated with these objects was so clearly in practice).    Why is this aspect of
material culture so variable in parts of the Upper Palaeolithic world such as
China or India? To debate this issue in the detail it requires would fill an entire




                                                                                            203
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               book. Suffice it to say here that as research continues in these areas, evidence for
               ritual-based art probably will turn up, as it has in Australia.
                 The    Ancients,   including   the   Neanderthals,    therefore    seem    to   have
               constructed their social worlds in a very different way from the Moderns. As
               Alexander Marshack has put it, the Ancients' capacity for communication and
               the   construction   of their social world     'were utilized   in   a   historically,
               demographically and contextually different milieu than was present in the
               European Upper Palaeolithic'. 19


               Campsites as symbols
               Having investigated the appearance of symbolic behaviour by examining the
               changes in art and technology, we will now take a look at the evidence from
               campsites. The first steps towards the more formal living spaces that began in
               the period 60,000-40,000 years ago became a gallop in the early Upper
               Palaeolithic. Hearths, huts and the ordered distribution of materials now
               became common. In many parts of Europe, the period from 40,000 to 20,000
               years ago was one of great climatic stress and consequently low population
               densities (Chapter 2). Substantial sites were widely scattered. Several formed
               impressive open-air villages. Nowhere is this better demonstrated than at the
               Kostenki complex of Palaeolithic villages that nestle in a small, steep-sided
               ravine by the Don River. Fifty years of systematic excavation have unearthed a
               suite of villages. At Kostenki 11, dated to 19,900 years ago, the circular footings
               of a structure survive. This hut was built from neatly stacked mammoth bones
               and encloses an area of some 39 sq. m or 420 sq. ft (pi. 89). Storage pits
               surround the structure. Larger excavations have uncovered a different layout at
               the famous site of Kostenki 1 level 1 (Kostenki I/i), with dates from 24,100 to
               21,300 years ago. Here two lines of regularly spaced hearths - each containing
               an impressive amount of bone coal considering they were used at a time of scant
               timber resources - are surrounded by subterranean pit dwellings and a lunar
               landscape of post holes and pits. The latter contain stored bone for fuel and
               possibly food. Bones of fur-bearing animals and large lumps of red ochre were
               also found in these pits, along with many carved animal and female statuettes.
               When one compares behaviour at this site with that at the open Mousterian site
               of Erd in Hungary or La Borde in France, or even with that at the relatively
               nearby site of Molodova on the Dnestr River during the period 60,000 to 40,000
               years ago, there can be only one conclusion: that the huge changes in behaviour
               that took place in the early Upper Palaeolithic resemble the flick of a switch and
               not the slow upwards movement of a symbolic dimmer.
                 Not surprisingly, these differences seem greater in Europe than elsewhere in
               the world. At Kostenki the northern ice sheets were only 700 km (430 miles)
               away, and effective winter houses were a necessity. But these structures were no
               longer simply a place to keep warm: huts were grouped into small villages.
               Thus architecture now embodies cultural, symbolic behaviour and not purely
               expedient survival behaviour.




204
                                                                            CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



                                                                           u
                                                               Sf\
         O     Pits


         #     Hearths                                       o          •
                                                                               o
                                                                       •
          '#   Areas of ash
                                                                       •
                                                                                     o
                                                      o°




                                                                                          o
                         mmu
                                             ^                                 o
                                                  O

j6   The oldest village on the Russian steppes was constructed c. 21,000 years ago at Kostenki, on
the Don River. Storage pits and possibly dwellings surround two lines of hearths,   where mammoth
bones were burnt for fuel since timber was scarce.




Burials in the open

Throughout this period 40,000-20,000 years ago we find examples not only of
impressive structures and campsite layouts, culminating in Kostenki I/i, but
also the first open-air burials. The triple burial recently unearthed ahead of the

bulldozers at Dolni Vestonice             (fig.   77)   is   just the latest in a list of such
discoveries,made all the more impressive by the lack of anything remotely
resembling a burial from an open site in any earlier period. The cave sites also
contain rich and complex burials. Margherita Mussi has studied a well-known
group from the Italian riviera, drawing attention to the intricacy of grave goods
in the early Upper Palaeolithic - for example the use of different dress codes to

symbolize the different status of the deceased (fig. 78).




                                                                                                        205
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?




                                                \\ \   DV J2£F>?%               >^^S%
                                                             -Ft--   •   _i^:       m
                                                                                :l£FU




                                                                 fT?1 2 f^l 3[flf] <[0«3 5 |TT71


         77   .4 frf^/s krw/,  27,000 years old, found in ig8s at the open site of Dolni Vestonice, Moravia.
              The central individual (of uncertain sex) is flanked by two males, both of whom had ivory
          pendants circling their skulls. A fire had been lit over the bodies and allowed to burn briefly before
                                                   the grave was filled.




          78 A reconstruction of one of the huts excavated at Dolni Vestonice, probably 27,000 years old.
          The site has yielded the earliest evidence for a ceramic technology that produced artistic figurines
                                             as well as pieces offired clay.




206
                                                                     CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES!




jg     Three richly adorned burials from
the Italian   Upper Palaeolithic, in
which status and sex was codified in
dress and ornament. The male on the
left   was excavated from Arene
Candide, the two figures on the right
from Barma Grande.



Imitation and change

To summarize, life at the fireside changed substantially between the Ancients
and the Moderns. It changed because symbolism in the Upper Palaeolithic
suffused many elements of behaviour, determining such mundane aspects of
life as the use of space      and objects of everyday existence. 20 Does a comparison
of campsites indicate that the Ancients had a symbolically organized culture?
We think not. In our view, Chatelperronian stone tools and the rudimentary
structures found at such sites as Molodova and Arcy-sur-Cure are evidence
that the Neanderthals had the capacity for emulation, for change, but not for
symbolism.
       We explain this as follows: the Neanderthals were under selective pressure,
both biological and cultural, to survive. Their decisions about making tools and
building camps therefore changed according to expediency and efficiency, they
were not simply bound by millennia-long traditions. The various choices made
are reflected       by variation       in   the archaeological record of the Ancients,
particularly from the period between 60,000 and 40,000 years ago. However,
when Neanderthals and Moderns came                    into contact in western   Europe
between 40,000 and 35,000 years ago, the Moderns changed the forces of
selection on Neanderthal behaviour. The social world in which the European
Neanderthals now participated was fundamentally different from the preced-
ing 100,000 years, and the archaeological evidence clearly indicates that the
Neanderthals imitated certain aspects of modern behaviour. But while they
could emulate they could not fully understand. We suspect, for example, that
the structures at Molodova and Arcy-sur-Cure more resembled 'nests' than the
symbolic 'homes' of the Moderns at Kostenki or Dolni Vestonice.
       So now let us turn to other aspects of life, to see whether here too we can find
evidence both to support our case for replacement and to enhance our
argument that the main structural difference distinguishing the Moderns from
the Ancients was the practice of symbolically organized behaviour.




                                                                                                 207
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               LIFE ON THE LAND

               The distribution of raw materials - stone, amber, shell - and the appearance of
               widespread styles in projectile points, figurines and ornament provide another
               example of the huge differences between the behaviour of the Ancients and that
               of the Moderns.



               The distances stone travelled
               Recent work on the distribution of stone raw materials supplies a dramatic
               example of the different scale at which the Moderns used the glacial landscapes
               of Europe after 40,000 years ago. We saw in Chapter 7 that Middle Palaeolithic
               raw materials generally came from within a radius of 50 km (31 miles) of a site.
               There are instances of transport from further afield but these are the
               exceptions. But during the early Upper Palaeolithic, 40,000 to 20,000 years ago,
               these distances increased markedly. Janusz Kozlowski found in Aurignacian
               levels (somewhat older than 40,000 years ago) at Bacho Kiro that 53 per cent of
               the flint used to make the blades was imported from more than 120 km (75
               miles)   away.    Elsewhere    in   early   Upper      Palaeolithic   Europe, distinctive
               chocolate-coloured, high-quality flint was transported from quarry sites in the
               Holy Cross Mountains of Poland over distance of up to 400 km (250 miles).
                 The raw materials used to make ornaments and other items of dress and
               display travelled the greatest distances. Since such ornaments are absent prior
               to 40,000 years     ago these distances are particularly significant. Marine and
               fossil   shells   used for ornaments are commonly found several hundred
               kilometres from their source, while fossil amber was traded from the Black Sea
               to sites up to 700    km (430 miles) away, on the central Russian plain. 21
                  Although       basic   raw materials     in   the    Upper   Palaeolithic   were   still

               predominantly traded locally, the long distances increasingly covered indicate a
               far more complex and widespread system of contact than almost anything in

               operation prior to 40,000 years ago.



               Artifact and art styles

               Widespread distribution is not confined to raw materials. Distinctive styles of
               art and artifacts could also be diffused over large areas, and these styles - when

               well dated - can provide an indicator of the scale of the social system concerned.
               As we will see, an increase in scale occurred in the geographical range of artistic
               style after 40,000 years ago, which is best understood as a new link between

               people and the land. And this link in turn arose as a consequence of those all-
               important changes in symbolic behaviour that                now influenced the shape,
               treatment and choice of objects.
                  In the period 60,000-40,000 years ago, we find distinctive projectile points
               with a wide regional distribution. These include the Aterian points of North
               Africa and the leaf points of northern and southeast                   Europe which we




208
                                                               CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES]



encountered in Chapter 7. Among other such artifacts number the triangular
hand axes of northwest Europe and perhaps the Lupemban picks of eastern and
southern Africa (see figs. 48 and 49). However, these styles represent only very
broad categories: considerable variation exists within each group, often over
fairly short distances. For instance, Philip Allsworth-Jones has conducted an

exhaustive analysis of the leaf points of Europe which demonstrates just how
variable they are in terms of their dimensions, technique of manufacture,
degree of retouch, and their associated flint assemblage. 22
     In contrast, stylistic forms during the early Upper Palaeolithic tended to be
much more uniform. The split-base bone points of the Aurignacian, for
example, are essentially alike throughout their European distribution, and
many Gravettian stone artifacts display a similar homogeneity. A good example
is   provided by the shouldered projectile points dating to 23,000-21,000 years
ago from Kostenki, Spadzista Street in Cracow and Willendorf on the banks of
the Danube in lower Austria. While variation still exists, there is undoubtedly
more standardization over these       large distances.   The uniformity further
increased after the last glacial     maximum about       18,000 years ago     when
population densities rose throughout this very broad            territory,   and   is

particularlymarked for organic artifacts such as the antler sleeves (which
served as mounts for flint gouges): these were scattered all the way between
Poland and southern France in the late glacial.
  The wider geographical spread of characteristic artifact types was also
matched by the diffusion of art. To start with, the early Upper Palaeolithic in
Europe was marked by regional styles, such as the small groups of animal and
anthropomorphic carvings from southern Germany. As the climate begins the
long drop to its nadir at 18,000 years ago, however, we find the first pan-
                                                                                        80 Shouldered
continental art style: the so-called   Venus figurines. 23 Although similar in
                                                                                        projectile points
overall design, a closer study of these figurines reveals some differences. The         from a. Cracow;
limestone figure from Willendorf, for instance, was covered in red ochre and            b.   Avdeevo, Russia;
                                                                                        and c. Willendorf.
has finely engraved bracelets on her wrists (pi. 91), whereas one of the Kostenki
I/i figurines was made of ivory,    and had details of a necklace carved on her
chest. Another fragmentary chalk figurine has a head decorated like the surface
of a golf ball. Other figurines depict facial features in a rudimentary fashion.
     Here, evidently, is a vibrant tradition. Yet for all the local differences in
detailand treatment, this group of figurines (dated to between 23,000 and
21,000 years ago) shares a striking similarity in design and style. Recently, the
Russian archaeologist Maria Gvozdover has undertaken a detailed analysis of
the rich collections of Venus figurines from the neighbouring (in Russian
terms) sites of Kostenki I/i and Avdeevo. 24 She concludes that the decorative
variety   is   linked to a female symbolism    common throughout the Upper
Palaeolithic at the time.   A wide-ranging tradition thus existed which, in her
words, 'transcends the bounds of the individual archaeological cultures' where
these small figurines were found. Gvozdover very importantly argues, on the
basis of the archaeological contexts in which these objects were recovered, that
the variation reflected the multiplicity of roles for the female image.




                                                                                                        209
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES:




               81    The distribution of 'Venus' figurines and bas-relief carvings.




               Style and survival
               In order to understand the stylistic similarities of Upper Palaeolithic art and
               artifacts, we must first appreciate how people use material culture to survive in

               harsh, unpredictable environments.                 One route to survival is obviously by
               improving technology, particularly houses and clothing. Another is to fine-
               tune hunting equipment to minimize the chances of failure when scarce prey is
               encountered. But these advances are inadequate by themselves if they are not
               backed up by social networks - alliances between relatives, trading partners,
               friends, peers and task groups. As we saw in Chapter 7, these alliances act as
               'insurance policies' in habitats (such as today's Arctic) where the only certainty
               is   that resources will sometimes fail.
                    We believe that these social and trading networks were only established by
               the    Moderns. There are two major reasons for this. First, the objects that
               symbolize such alliances (i.e. the figurines and ornaments that seem to have no
               immediate utilitarian function), appeared only after 40,000 years ago. Second,
               populations after this time were apparently better equipped to survive
               worsening climates, suggesting the existence of social 'insurance policies' (in
               marked contrast to the Ancients who tended to become locally extinct during
               particularly harsh conditions). As a result, there was a reduction in the ebb and
               flow of settlement within regions under environmental stress.




210
                                                                  CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES



  Let us expand on these two themes. Style, the means by which objects are
made distinctive, is a fundamental trait of modern human behaviour, especially
when it is applied to objects of social value (such as necklaces and figurines)
rather than to functional items (e.g. points and hand axes) alone. Through
style, therefore, material culture can be used as a means of transmitting

information in a visual manner. So, using the Venus figurines as an example,
how can style assist social alliances? Well, art is a form of visual communication.
Style can aid social communication and cooperation because distant relatives
and strangers, individuals and groups identify with each other through sharing
a common, recognizable symbolism. The vital meetings that took place
between low-density populations on the steppe tundra of Ice Age Europe
would have been infrequent and unpredictable, but they were a key to long-
term survival. Having a shared material culture would have facilitated a
successful outcome to such meetings.
  The messages an 'art' object carries depends for their full interpretation on
the contexts and rituals in which the object is used. Unfortunately we will never
fully understand the particular messages denoted by Palaeolithic objects. But

while we cannot specify how Venus figurines were used, or why females were
always carved, or even     why some of them show consistent, exaggerated
proportions (all elements which define them as part of a stylistic, geographical
group), their distribution and dating clearly point to their function in allowing
people to navigate their way through critical negotiations. We believe it is no
coincidence that the figurines appeared in central and eastern Europe at a time
when climates were deteriorating and food resources dwindling, as the ice
sheets   expanded towards their maximum extent. 25 For without the social
alliances   which such objects symbolize, these areas would have been
unoccupied during the period 23,000-21,000 years ago.


Patterns of settlement

Another way to test the contribution made by art and other forms of material
culture to the expansion of human communities          is   to   examine settlement
distribution. Consider, for instance, the settlement history of a particularly
harsh region of Ice Age Europe: Germany. The Middle Palaeolithic sites were
abandoned during severe climatic phases whereas settlements during the early
Upper Palaeolithic survived somewhat longer; and occupation only ceased
during the harshest periods of the last glacial maximum.
  The evidence we reviewed in Chapter 7 suggested that during the Middle
Palaeolithic the Ancients achieved subsistence security by forming small, self-
sufficient local units. It was rare for individuals or small task groups to operate

                                      of time away from the local range in
at any great distance or for any length

which most of the population was concentrated.
  The environment continued to exert a stong influence on settlement during
the Upper Palaeolithic. The use of the German region was probably specialized
and infrequent during the early Upper Palaeolithic. It is unlikely, for example,




                                                                                              211
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               that any winter villages existed in this area. The archaeological traces are most
               probably those of small task groups visiting the region as part of their most
               distant reconnoitres from their home bases. These trips may have taken place
               during weak ameliorations in the Ice Age climate that lasted a few decades in
               most centuries.
                 So, as the Upper Palaeolithic demonstrates, a presence in a climatically
               severe region like Germany - as the ice sheets crept out from the north and
               south   - depended as much on the ability to create very extensive social
               networks as it did on improvements in technology. After all, you can have the
               best-sewn skin and fur clothing, but without the social networks to back you up
               survival     will   be   brief.    It   is   worth remembering that the Neanderthals
               disappeared under similar conditions. Their reaction to environmental decline
               was not to intensify their self-help networks but instead to relocate to areas
               where the resources could still support existing life-styles at more favourable
               population densities.



               Society and stone tools

               We can draw two conclusions from the foregoing comparison of the changing
               use of the landscape. In the first place Neanderthals had much smaller societies
               than any Moderns who later came to use their habitats. To ensure biological
               reproduction there would have had to be a mating network of 175 to 500
               people. 26 But beyond this biological limit Neanderthals seemingly showed little
               interest in establishing social ties.           Group self-sufficiency in all things (food,
               mates, raw materials) was their basic strategy rather than using the alliances
               that could be built, through negotiation, to extend the length of occupation in a
               region now subject to difficult climatic conditions.
                 Our second conclusion is that the Neanderthals were essentially hominids
               assisted in their survival by tools. Their material culture, dominated by stone

               artifacts,was not symbolically organized. They did not have culture in the
               sense  we understand it today and recognize it over the last 40,000 years.
               Artifacts may have been manufactured according to the same prototypes, but
               we doubt that style as defined above played much if any part in determining
               these shapes.       Middle        Palaeolithic    hand axes and scrapers     are certainly
               repetitive, but then so too are the elaborately constructed nests of birds. Just as
               birds are assisted in their survival by the nests they build, so too, we argue, were
               Neanderthals as tool-assisted hominids.
                 How can we be so sure of these two conclusions? On the one hand there is the
               long-term evidence for the ebb and flow of Middle Palaeolithic populations,
               especially as the climatic cycles ran their repetitive course in northern Europe.
               The distribution of Neanderthals appears to be environmentally determined:
               when faced with a climatic challenge they do not intensify, as the Moderns did,
               but instead disappear from the record until better times returned.
                 On the other hand there is the fundamental development, the creative
               explosion, of style as a means of shaping material culture. Style in this context is




212
                                                                             CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES:



                  ANCIENTS                                   MODERNS



                                    450000 km




               50000 km




      "V Regional breeding group                      \« Style boundary
      /^ Local group area                             y     Shell exchange network

           Local stone source                               Quarry
                                                      y Stone exchange network
                                                        x




82 The social revolution. The main difference between the societies of the Ancients (including the
Neanderthals) and the Moderns was one of scale and complexity. We interpret the archaeological
evidence for increasingly far-flung exchange and social interaction as an indication that the
emphasis of survival shifted from local self-sufficiency among the Ancients to a system of storage
based on social ties and alliances, thus reducing the risk of starvation. With this leap in scale came
the opportunity to expand territories and acquire raw materials over much greater distances.
Colonization could then proceed rapidly as, perhaps unintentionally, social solutions were found to
survival problems in the environment.


an expression of a more complicated social life. The messages it helps transmit
gather their meaning from society, the relationships between people and the
many different contexts where these are constructed. The Ancients, as tool-
assisted hominids, clearly had societies but these were not as complicated as
those of the Moderns since the former did not deal with people who were
socially or spatially distant.          As a result the Ancients never took out those
'insurance policies'. Consequently they did not cross the oceans or colonize the
inhospitable interiors of continental Asia. This is why the Ancients remained
Old World hominids.
   Their lack of art is now understandable. There was no need for it to assist in
ceremonies and negotiations. Equally, there may not have been the need for
complex language. Their geographically small, self-sufficient societies did not
need to further elaborate their social communication by visual means. Their
use of raw materials is also entirely consistent with the local level of their
existence.   Why bother with distant imports when a serviceable local stone will
probably do, especially since one of the reasons for using exotic stone is the ties
that come with it? But all of this only makes sense if we begin to see that the
fundamental difference between the Ancients and Moderns is social.                              The
answer to our earlier question - did the Neanderthals have culture? - is now
becoming clearer.




                                                                                                         213
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?




                    83 Around the world in 40,000 years. Very approximate dates offirst settlement by anatomically modern




               EXPANSION INTO NEW HABITATS
               The final level of comparison provides a further opportunity to examine our
               case for replacement. One of the most distinctive aspects of modern humanity
               is   the near global distribution of our species,            which was achieved during
               prehistory. 27 For many years this was put down either to chance (given enough
               time everywhere will be settled eventually) or the fortunate invention of
               appropriate technology (such as boats). Neither of these explanations are
               satisfactory in the light of the pattern and timing of global colonization after

               40,000 years ago. Charting this process has been one of the great achievements
               of contemporary archaeology. With the benefit of hindsight we can look back
               into the Palaeolithic and see more clearly the constraints on the Ancients which




214
                                                                                         CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?




humans are indicated (in years before the present) for those regions where there is sufficient evidence.




           resulted in their comparatively restricted Old World distribution. Once again
           the differences between the Ancients and Moderns - in terms of how rapidly
           and how many of the habitable parts of the earth they colonized - are too great
           for any model of continuity to be able reasonably to explain.
              We can trace the consequences of having smaller societies throughout the
           Ancients' world. It was, in terms of hominid colonization, half a million years
           or more of inaction. The exit from sub-Saharan Africa just before                          i    million
           years ago saw a fairly rapid colonization of many parts of the Old World.
           During      this   first   African dispersal, however, several environments and
           landforms remained unsettled.               Among these were islands and mountain
           chains, the large sand deserts and tropical rain forests, and the Siberian boreal
           forests. Perhaps this was partly due to the severe continental climates where -




                                                                                                                     215
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               even today, in an interglacial - the winter temperatures drop off the scale. But
               more significant is the uncertainty of food in such environments. It is possible
               to make a living, as the fisher-gatherer-hunters of Siberia and the Canadian
               sub-Arctic still do today; but their low population densities indicate just how
               difficult this is. Survival in these environments requires forward planning and

               the intricate scheduling of time and labour to catch fish and deer, and gather
               berries and plant foods. Inhabitants of such environments, as we have
               discussed, also need social networks to back up the periodic disasters. The
               absence of Ancients in eastern Siberia points very clearly to the mismatch
               between the food resources in that environment and the Ancients' society.
               Food was always available in these habitats, it was simply high-risk to exploit.
               This suggests that the barriers to colonization were determined primarily by
               the nature of the Ancients themselves, and not by the environment.


               The colonization of Australia and the Americas
               The surge of colonization achieved by the Moderns is quite remarkable. They
               crossed the     Sunda trench to Australia and settled an unfamiliar continent
               inhabited by marsupials. The earliest dates range from possibly 55,000 years
               ago in the Malakunanja rockshelter in the northern territory, to 35,000 years
               ago at Warreen cave in southwest Tasmania. Recent work by Chris Gosden,
               Jim Allen and Matthew Spriggs in the Bismarck archipelago and Solomon
               islands on the western rim of the Pacific has shown that by 32,000 years ago
               people were making substantial ocean voyages. 28 The stone tools from
               excavations such as Matenkupkum on New Ireland are typologically
               amorphous and reminiscent of the Middle Palaeolithic. But we have already
               seen how unsatisfactory stone tools can be as a measure of modernity;
               colonization is a much better guide to fundamental changes in behaviour than
               stone tool typology and technology.
                 It is not until the Moderns appear that evidence is forthcoming for entry into

               the Americas, the timing of which is still hotly contested.         We favour a late
               arrival,around 15,000 years ago, but a vociferous camp would more than
               double that figure. There are no serious suggestions, however, that any people
               but the Moderns crossed the Bering land bridge into North America. All these
               great bursts of colonization led eventually to the occupation of most of the
               continents and major islands in prehistory. Indeed,             when the world was
               rediscovered by European explorers in the last 500 years, the only attractive
               lands they found uninhabited were remote areas such as some of the islands in
               the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. They had been beaten to it for the most part by
               the prehistoric Moderns. On the continents, the only vacant regions were above
               the permanent snowline.



               Did they have culture? Could they speak?
               Earlier    in   this   chapter   we   characterized   the   Ancients,   including   the
               Neanderthals, as tool-assisted hominids. Technology was one of the varied




216
                                                                       CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



strategies adopted to solve the problems of survival. Artifacts and                weapons,
campsites and landscapes were never elaborated in the cultural ways that are so
basic to any definition of what makes a modern human modern.
  But for all their differences from us, it would be a mistake to write off the
Ancients and particularly the Neanderthals in that period from 60,000 to
40,000 years ago. They did not do what Moderns did, but they were around for
a long time and, but for the appearance of the Moderns, they would probably

still   be around today. They were not failures merely because they had no art
and never visited the Great Barrier Reef. As we saw in Chapter 7, recent work
on the organization of their stone technologies by Steven Kuhn has indicated
diversity within uniformity.           A narrow stereotype of the Neanderthals (or
indeed any other regional population of Ancients) is clearly an unwarranted
simplification. The Ancients existed within quite a different social order from
our own, with only limited planning depth and organization. But this does not
mean they were capable only of a single form of behaviour, found throughout
the     Old World, and modified exclusively by changes in the availability of
animal and plant species.
   Culture is a difficult word. Some have seen it as an archaeological grail, its
investigation forming the focus of the discipline. Culture has been declared the
means of human adaptation as well as the resource for demonstrating human
diversity unrelated to mechanical survival. It looms large in any definition of
what is, and what is not, modern. In a recent paper linking the first spoken
languages with the appearance of art Iain Davidson and William Noble come to
this conclusion: 'There can be no such thing as culture without language and

the socially determined sharing of meaning and value. It will therefore be
misleading to talk of culture for any hominids before fully modern humans.' 29
   We feel, however, that while spoken language adds incalculably to the
elaboration of culture we should avoid pinning all definitions of modernity on
one element, however significant it may seem to us. To do so is to run the risk
either of simply fulfilling our initial assumptions or of failing to supply an
adequately reasoned explanation for the major differences between the
Ancients and the Moderns. The Neanderthal and Modern debate is very much
a parable     about insiders and outsiders in the modern world, those who are
savage and those who are civilized. 30
   We examined in Chapter 4 the anatomical evidence for Neanderthal voice
boxes. They could certainly communicate, as can all social animals, and they no
doubt spoke,         albeit   simply    and probably slowly.        We argue that the
Neanderthals lacked complex spoken language because they did not need it.
We could not imagine life without           it,   but they did not have the social life to
require     it.   Robert Whallon takes the view that language             itself   gradually
evolved, rather than emerged fully formed. 31 He points out in particular that
the part of language to develop last was probably the element (known as the
tense-modality aspect) that refers to the future. This only appeared in the
context of colonization, for long-term planning and extended social networks
were needed to reduce the risks involved in migration and survival.




                                                                                                   217
CLOSE KIN OR DISTANT RELATIVES?



               Where did modern behaviour originate?
               Archaeology often likes to deal with questions of origin. Where did agriculture
               first evolve?   Why did cities first appear in the Middle East? Where is the cradle
               for the origins of humankind?
                 We believe that the geographical origins of anatomically modern humans lie
               somewhere in Africa. We can be less certain about the source of modern
               behaviour. The time-lag between the earliest modern-looking humans in East
               Africa (Omo Kibish perhaps as much as 130,000 years old) and the Middle East
               (Qafzeh, Skhul       f.   100,000 years old), and the appearance of Moderns in
               Australia (c. 55,000 years ago?) plus the symbolic explosion in art and burials
               after 40,000 years ago makes it difficult to point to any one area as the centre.
               Perhaps the early dates from Australia suggest some region in Southeast Asia;
               early Moderns may have evolved cultural behaviour here which then - on the
               timescale of human evolution - quickly sped around the world. The Middle
               East (regarded by many as a crossroads) may also have been such a centre,
               exporting behaviour to existing populations of Moderns in the east and, as the
               Moderns themselves spread to the west, into continents such as Europe.
                 The source of modern behaviour will remain conjectural until we have a
               better understanding of which evolutionary forces and mechanisms actually
               shaped modern behaviour. What is quite clear, however, is that wherever new
               developments took place they did so rapidly (the flick of a switch), adapting to
               the anatomy of modern humans that had been around for perhaps 70,000 years.
               Such behaviour, based on the structural principles of symbolically organized
               culture, spread rather like a virus among the host population, and then spread
               further as the host itself now expanded. The rapidity of the process, which took
               place so many thousands of years ago, makes it difficult for archaeologists to
               study. But - like the remnant ripples of radiation that recently confirmed the
               Big Bang theory of the origins of the Universe without indicating exactly where
               ithappened - we believe that the global expansion of humans which began
               some 60,000-40,000 years ago is evidence of replacement and not continuity as
               the mechanism of the human revolution.




                       Epilogue: The Lesson for Human Unity


               Let us return once more to the question we posed at the beginning of the book:
               how can we best explain the evidence for human evolution? We hope that we
               have demonstrated convincingly that population replacement            is   the   most
               plausible interpretation of the archaeological and anthropological record of the
               later Pleistocene.        Our study has focused in particular on the differences
               between the Neanderthals and modern humans, and we determined that the




218
                                                          epilogue: the lesson for human unity



fundamental differences between the two populations lay in their society and
culture as well as in their anatomy.        We found that the two communities were
supported by different capacities for communication - verbal, visual and
symbolic - and that this in turn affected their organization of campsites, their
exploitation of the landscape, and their colonization of new habitats. But to
conclude that the Neanderthals were different from us is not to condemn them
in the   same way that earlier popularizers and scientists did. Our model of
replacement does not carry the moral implications of, say, Boule's theories, nor
the negative judgment implicit in the quotations opening this chapter from
H.G. Wells and the Quennells. The Neanderthals were not ape-men, nor
missing links - they were as human as us, but they represented a different brand
of humanity,       one with a distinctive blend of primitive and advanced
characteristics.   There was nothing          inevitable about the      triumph of the
Moderns, and a twist of Pleistocene fate could have left the Neanderthals
occupying Europe to this day. The 30,000 years by which we have missed them
represent only a few ticks of the Ice Age clock.
  Multiregionalists are often all too quick to attack studies such as this for
being unscientific and contrary to the spirit of the times. Milford Wolpoff, for
instance, has written:

   The spread of humankind and its differentiation into distinct geographic
   groups that persisted through long periods of time, with evidence of long-
   lasting   contact and cooperation,         in   many ways   is   a   more   satisfying
   interpretation of human prehistory than a scientific rendering of the story of
   Cain, based on one population quickly, and completely, and most likely
   violently,   replacing   all   others.   This rendering of modern population
   dispersals is a story of 'making war and not love', and if true its implications
   are not pleasant. 32

Thus according to Wolpoff, it is preferable to include than to exclude, to speak
of differences simply as variation rather than to attempt to understand them or
their significance.
  We, on the other hand, feel that it is pointless to seek winners or losers in the
story of human evolution, for each age will place its own gloss on history.
Rather, we should accept that differences exist, and use them to broaden our
definitions and discussions of humanity. For although the Neanderthals were,
quite simply, 'not us', they - or rather their African kin - provided the basis
from which we sprang; both they and the early Moderns have a place in our
prehistory, whether or not they were our actual lineal ancestors. Many before
us have dropped an impenetrable curtain between the Neanderthals and the
Moderns. But we believe that, if a curtain exists at all, it 'has no near or far side,
only a highly patterned warp and weft stemming from the rich potential of
culture,   however simple or complex, volatile or repetitive.' 33 In conclusion,
therefore, we would urge an investigation of the curtain itself, for we should
celebrate our rich and varied prehistory as a route to enhancing, in these multi-
cultural times, our understanding of ourselves.




                                                                                            219
                                                                                   1                             A
                                                                                                                 1




                                     Appendix: Selected Absolute Dates




                        Dating                                             Date               SD±
Site/Region             method       Hominids   Archaeology                (ooos years ago)   (ooos)   Comments            Source


Mumba Ca\c              14C                                                  26.9                      Bed 111             Clark 1988

   Africa
Batho Kiro              14C                     Early Upper Palaeolithic     20.                       Layer 6a/7          Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Mumba Cave              14C                     MSA                        5*3°                                            Clark 1988
   Africa
Nunamira Cave           14c                     Flakes and Cores             30-4             0.69     Unit 1 1/2          Cosgrovc ct al 1990
   Australia

ORS 7                   14C                     Flakes and Cores             30.8                      Layer 3             Cosgrovc ct al 1990
   Australia


STAGE 2/3 BOUNDARY 32,000 years ago BP
St Ccsairc              TL                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     321                       Layer 6             Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     323                       BaseC               Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Bacho Kiro              4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     32-7                      Layer 6b            Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     33 3                      Lower C             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Matcnkupkum             4C                      Flakes and Cores             33                        Layer 7             Allen ct al. 1988

   Pacific

Boker A                 4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic    '33-4                                          Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Boker A                 4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic    •33-6                                          Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     33-9                      MidC                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     34               0.4      MidC                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Moustcrian                   34 1             075      E2BE    1 1   6-3   BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
Border Cave             ESR                     MSA 3                       34S7                       Unit 2BS            Grim ct al 1990
   Africa
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     34 5                      Lower C             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Boker Tachtit           4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic    •35                        Level 4             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar                4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     35 4                      Lower C             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Gcisscnklostcrlc Cave   4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     36                        lib                 Hahn 1982
   Europe
St Ccsairc              TL                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     36-3                      Layer 8             Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
El Castillo             4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     37-7                      l8b2                Cabrera Valdcs & Bischoff 1989
   Europe
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     37-7                      E2BE111-1           BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
L'Arbreda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     37-7                      E2BE111-2           BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
Boker A                 4C                      Early Upper Palaeolithic     37 9                                          Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
St Ccsairc              TL                      Moustcrian [Denticulate]     382                       Layer 1             Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
EI Castillo             4C [AMS]                Early Upper Palaeolithic     38.5                      iSbi                Cabrera Valdcs & Bischoff 1989
   Europe
Sclayn Cave             4C                      Moustcrian                   386                       Level 1             Huxtablc 1988
   Europe
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     387                       E2BE111-4           BischofTct al 1989
   Europe
Douara                  4C                      Moustcrian                   389                       Top IVB             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Combe Grcnal            4C                      Moustcrian [Denticulate]     39                        12                  Bowman & Sicvcking 1983
   Europe
L'Arbrcda               4 C [AMS]               Moustcrian                   39-4                      E2BE116-1           Bischoff ct al 1989
   Europe
L'Arbreda               4 C [AMS]               Early Upper Palaeolithic     39-9                      E2BE    1 1   1-3   Bischoff ct al 1989
   Europe
Abric Romani            U   scries              Moustcrian                  39-6o                                          Bischoff ct al 1989
   Europe
Midhishi 2              TL & 14C                MSA                          40-70                                         Clark 1988
   Africa




                                                                                                                                                     221
                                                                                                                   A1




appendix: selected radiocarbon dates



                  Dating                                                    Date               SD±
 Site/Region      method         Hominids        Archaeology                (000s years ago)   (000s)   Comments                 Source


El Castillo       i
                      4 C[AMS]                   Early Upper Palaeolithic     4°               2.1      18c                      Cabrera Valdes & Bischoff 1989
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL             Neanderthal     Moustcrian [Typical]         403              2.6      J                        Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             None                         40.9                      I                        Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
St Ccsairc        TL                             Moustcrian [Denticulate]     40.9             2-5      Layer 10                 Mcrcicr ct al 1991
   Europe
L'Arbrcda         14C [AMS]                      Mousterian                   41.4             1.6      E2BE116-3                Bischoff ct al 1989

   Europe
Amud              ESR            Neanderthal     ?Moustcrian                  4i 5                      Layer B                  Griin and Stringer 1991

   Middle East
St Ccsairc        TL                             Moustcrian [Denticulate]     424              4.8      Layer 12                 Mcrcier ct al 1991
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             Moustcrian [MTA B]           42-5                      H2-H9                    Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
Lc Mousticr       ESR                            Moustcrian [MTA B]          397-41                     H                        Mcllars and Grun 1991
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             Mousterian                   42.6             3-7      K                        Valladas ct al 1986

   Europe
Border Cave       ESR                            Howicsons Poort              42-59                     Unit 3BS                 Griin ct al 1990
   Africa

Border Cave       ESR            early Modern    Howicsons Poort              42-64                     Unit 3WA                 Griin ct al 1990
   Africa

Bacho Kiro        .
                      4c         PModcrn         Early Upper Palaeolithic   >43                         Layer 1                  Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Douara            .+C                            Moustcrian                 >43                         Mid IVB                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Douara            14C                            Moustcrian                 >43-2                       Mid IVB                  Bar-Y'oscf 1989

   Middle East
Douara            14C                            Mousterian                 >43-2                       Lower IVB                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Ksar Akil         14C                            Moustcrian                   433              1.2                               Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Ksar Akil         14C                            Moustcrian                   43-7             i-5      B?                       Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Combe Grenal      TL                             Moustcrian [Denticulate]     44               4        20                       Bowman & Sio eking 1983
   Europe
Sclav n Cave      TL                             Mousterian                   44               5-5      Level 1                  Huxtablc 1988
   Europe
Guattari          ESR            Neanderthal     Moustcrian [Pontinian]       44-5^2                    Surface deposit          Griin and Stringer 1991
   Europe                                                                                                    including cranium
Guattari          ESR                            Moustcrian [Pontinian]       4454                      Gi                       Grun and Stringer 1991
   Europe
Banyolas          U scries       Neanderthal                                  45               4        Matrix                   Julia and Bischoff 1991

   Europe
Bokcr Tachtit     I4 c                           Early Upper Palaeolithic   2*45-5                      Level 1                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Malakunanja II    TL                             Flakes and Cores             46               9        2.3m depth               Roberts ct al 1990
   Australia

Lc Mousticr       TL                             Mousterian [MTA B]           463              3        Hi                       Valladas ct al 1986
   Europe
Bokcr Tachtit     14C                            Early Upper Palaeolithic     46.9             2-4      Level 1                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Shanidar          14C            .'Neanderthal   Moustcrian                   46.9             '5       Layer D                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Bokcr Tachtit     I4   c                         Early Upper Palaeolithic     47-2             9        Level 1                  Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
La Chapcllc       ESR            Neanderthal     Moustcrian [Quina]           475(>                     Bed    1                 Griin and Stringer 1991
   Europe
Bacho Kiro        14C                            Moustcrian [Typical]       >47 5                       Layer 13                 Kozlowski 1982
   Europe
Border Cave       ESR                            MSA 3                        47-53                     Unit 2VVA                Griin ct al 1990
   Africa
loton             TL                             Moustcrian [Quina]           48               3                                 Valladas ct al 1987
   Europe
Amud              ESR            Neanderthal     -Moustcrian                  49-5             4        Layer B                  Grun and Stringer 1991
   Middle East
Fonscigncr        TL                             Moustcrian [MT A]            50.2             53       Level      D upper       Valladas ct al 1987
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       TL                             Moustcrian [MTA A]           503              5-5      G4                       Valladas ct al 1986
   Europe
Lc Mousticr       ESR                            Moustcrian [MTA A]           43 47                     G                        Mcllars and Griin 1991
   Europe
Shanidar          14C            .'Neanderthal   Moustcrian                   S06              3        Layer      D             Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
Guattari          U scries        Neanderthal    Moustcrian [Pontinian]       51               3        Layer Go                 Griin and Stringer 1991
   Europe
 Malakunanja II   TL                             Flakes and Cores             52               11                                Roberts ct al 1990
   Australia
 Douara           14C                            Moustcrian                 >5*                         Lower IVB                Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
 Ras cl Kclb      >4C                            Moustcrian                 >52                         B                        Bar-Yoscf 1989
   Middle East
 Fonscigncr       TL                             Moustcrian [Typical]         52.8             5-5      Level      D middle      Valladas ct al 1987
   Europe




222
                                                                                                                                                                  |




                                                                                              appendix: selected radiocarbon dates



                      Dating                                                    Date               SD±
Site/Region           method          Hominids         Archaeology                    years ago)
                                                                                (000s yea          (000s)   Comments                 Source


Douara                ,
                          4c                           Moustcrian               >S3«                        1MB                      Bar-Yoscf 1989
